----------------------- Page 1-----------------------

Jauhar Ali 
Shabir Hussain Wani   Editors 

Rice  
Improvement 

Physiological, Molecular Breeding and  
Genetic Perspectives 

----------------------- Page 2-----------------------

Rice Improvement 

----------------------- Page 3-----------------------

Jauhar Ali  •  Shabir Hussain Wani 
Editors 

Rice Improvement 

Physiological, Molecular Breeding  
and Genetic Perspectives 

----------------------- Page 4-----------------------

Editors 
Jauhar Ali                                                    Shabir Hussain Wani 
                                                                                           
Hybrid Rice Breeder, Senior Scientist II,                     Assistant Professor/Scientist, Mountain  
Leader, Hybrid Rice Breeding Cluster,                         Research Centre for Field Crops 
Head, Hybrid Rice Development                                 Sher-e-Kashmir University of Agricultural  
Consortium (HRDC)                                             Sciences and Technology 
International Rice Research Institute (IRRI)                  Kashmir, Jammu and Kashmir, India 
Metro Manila, Philippines 

This book is an open access publication. 
ISBN 978-3-030-66529-6                         ISBN 978-3-030-66530-2               (eBook) 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-66530-2 

© The Editor(s) (if applicable) and The Author(s) 2021, Corrected Publication 2021 
Open  Access    This  book  is  licensed  under  the  terms  of  the  Creative  Commons  Attribution  4.0  
International    License    (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/),          which    permits    use,   sharing,  
adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give appropriate credit  
to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons license and indicate if  
changes were made. 
The  images  or  other  third  party  material  in  this  book  are  included  in  the  book's  Creative  Commons  
license, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in the book’s  
Creative Commons license and your intended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the  
permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. 
The use of general descriptive names, registered names, trademarks, service marks, etc. in this publication  
does not imply, even in the absence of a specific statement, that such names are exempt from the relevant  
protective laws and regulations and therefore free for general use. 
The publisher, the authors, and the editors are safe to assume that the advice and information in this book  
are believed to be true and accurate at the date of publication. Neither the publisher nor the authors or the  
editors give a warranty, expressed or implied, with respect to the material contained herein or for any  
errors or omissions that may have been made. The publisher remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional  
claims in published maps and institutional affiliations. 

This Springer imprint is published by the registered company Springer Nature Switzerland AG 
The registered company address is: Gewerbestrasse 11, 6330 Cham, Switzerland 

----------------------- Page 5-----------------------

Dedicated to the 60th Anniversary of the  
International Rice Research Institute  
(IRRI) and to the global rice research  
community. 

----------------------- Page 6-----------------------

Foreword 

Rice is one of the most significant cereal crops globally, intertwined with food and  
human culture. Ninety percent of the rice produced and consumed in Asia is linked  
to poverty. Rice is a model crop for geneticists, physiologists, and biotechnologists.  
The recent advances in their areas got a boost from the sequenced 3000 rice genomes  
that are placed in the public domain for exploitation and will provide greater depth  
and a more complete picture of the genetic information. A deeper understanding of  
rice  physiology,  molecular  breeding,  and  genetics  could  pave  the  way  for  more  
sustainable varietal products for the benefit of humanity, particularly for those living  
in the developing world. On this subject, the editors of this book have attempted to  
highlight rice research advances in the fields of physiology, molecular breeding, and  
genetics, with a focus on increasing productivity, improving biotic and abiotic stress  
tolerance, and improving the nutritional quality of rice. This book offers a balanced  
set  of  chapters  after  the  authors  in  the  opening  chapter  give  an  overview  of  the  
advances in genetics and breeding of rice. It is widely understood that increasing  
plant biomass and its efficient translocation to the sink hold the key to increasing  
grain yield. Another chapter targets the strategies for engineering photosynthesis for  
enhanced plant biomass production. It is vital to use the green traits concerning  
multiple abiotic and biotic stresses, including water- and nutrient-use efficiencies.  
Breeding of climate-resilient rice varieties could effectively provide insurance to  
rice  farmers  to  combat  against  climatic  turbulence.  Hybrid  rice  technology  is  
becoming the most viable option to meet global food security concerns as it assures  
a 20–25% yield advantage over the best inbred varieties. It faces two major chal- 
lenges for its wide-scale adoption. First, heterosis per se needs to be attractive for  
farmers by assuring them a stable yield advantage of >25% over inbred varieties  
besides addressing market requirements. Second, the higher hybrid rice seed repro- 
ducibility (>3 t/ha) and decreased production costs should be attractive to the seed  
industry.  In  this  regard,  two-line  hybrid  rice  breeding  is  reclaiming  attention  to  
make rice hybrids more heterotic and more efficient for hybrid seed production.  
This two-line hybrid technology is likely to reach farmers in a big way at an afford- 
able cost. In recent times, irrigation water scarcity for agriculture, particularly for  
rice, requires the development of water-use-efficient and drought-tolerant rice culti- 

                                                                                                   vii 

----------------------- Page 7-----------------------

viii                                                                                 Foreword 

vars. Understanding drought physiology and developing drought-tolerant varieties  
are  the  need  of  the  hour.  Recently,  the  COVID-19  pandemic  showed  a  massive  
shortage of labor for transplanted rice that has sparked interest in adopting direct- 
seeded  rice  (DSR)  in  many  parts  of  India  and  other  rice-producing  countries.  
However, systematic breeding for DSR is still in its infancy. The development of  
DSR varieties with the appropriate set of traits such as anaerobic germination, her- 
bicide  tolerance,  weed  competitiveness,  effective  germination  under  deeper  seed  
placement, and uniform seedling establishment can help improve and popularize  
this technology. The use of DSR varieties and associated genetics and management  
technologies  is  going  to  improve  rice  cultivation  with  less  water  without  losing  
grain yield. Also, there will be a considerable decrease in greenhouse gas emissions  
and a decrease in global warming to some extent. Increasing global temperatures  
are  going  to  cause  havoc  to  agriculture  in  particular,  and  breeding  heat-tolerant  
varieties  is  going  to  be  a  challenging  task  while  sustaining  current  yield  rates.  
Global climatic aberrations are causing more areas to experience cold spells, par- 
ticularly in temperate regions, where higher rice productivity is attained. Breeding  
for  rice  varieties  with  tolerance  of  low-temperature  stress  is  another  important  
objective to be fulfilled. Many parts of the world are facing toxic elements such as  
arsenic  entering  into  the  food  system.  In  many  places  in  Eastern  India  and  
Bangladesh, rice is being cultivated in arsenic-polluted environments. It is impor- 
tant for breeders to develop suitable rice varieties that would restrict arsenic from  
entering into rice grain and straw, thereby making this rice safer for human con- 
sumption and straw for cattle. 
   Likewise, breeding for tolerance against insect pests and diseases is an area of  
much concern, especially under the changing climatic scenario that is triggering the  
evolution  of  new  pathogen  strains  and  leaving  rice  more  susceptible  than  ever.  
Molecular approaches to breed varieties with insect pest and disease resistance are  
essential  and  provide  an  opportunity  for  using  broad-spectrum  resistance  genes.  
However,  with  the  recent  advances  in  genome  editing  tools,  it  will  be  relatively  
easier to incorporate tolerance by understanding the molecular basis of this toler- 
ance. To maximize the genetic gains, researchers are attempting to speed up breed- 
ing  in  many  crops.  Recent  technological  innovations  promise  to  accelerate  the  
growth and life cycle of the rice crop considerably to allow four generations per  
year.  Interestingly,  another  powerful  alternative  technology  is  doubled  haploids  
(DH), which could fix segregating lines in less than 6 months. Scaling up of the DH  
approach is one of the most important approaches and using new genetic technolo- 
gies around this could be a game changer for future breeding programs. 
   Rice is often linked to poverty in many parts of the world, where it constitutes the  
primary source of calories. Hidden hunger arises when essential nutrients such as  
zinc and iron are missing from a staple diet. Therefore, an increased effort is required  
for the biofortification of rice varieties with adequate concentrations of zinc and  
iron by mainstreaming rice breeding itself. 

----------------------- Page 8-----------------------

Foreword                                                                                ix 

   I would like to congratulate the editors of this book for bringing out a valuable  
collection of chapters concerning the most important aspects of rice research. This  
book will serve as a vital reference tool of benefit to rice scientists, students, policy- 
makers, and other researchers in academia and industry. 

Gurdev S. Khush FRS 
Member US National Academy of Sciences 
Adjunct Professor Emeritus 
University of California, 
Davis, CA 95616 USA 

Former Head, Plant Breeding Genetics and Biotechnology, IRRI 
Los Baños, Philippines 

----------------------- Page 9-----------------------

Preface 

The global human population is rapidly increasing. This is placing enormous pres- 
sure on all available natural resources needed to feed 9.7 billion people by 2050,  
which poses a severe threat of hunger and chaos to all of humanity in the coming  
decades. The food security situation will become worse with global climatic aberra- 
tions. Rice, among the staple cereal crops, could be much affected, especially in  
Asia, where more than 90% of the crop is produced and consumed. Rice production  
and productivity need to be augmented even though we have limited land, water,  
and chemical inputs. The challenge is to develop climate-resilient rice varieties that  
will provide insurance for the farmers growing them, and in a sustainable manner.  
Most biotic and abiotic stresses are complex in nature. Because of the quantitative  
mode of inheritance and tolerance traits being governed by genes with minor effects,  
this  limits  their  accelerated  and  precise  improvement  using  conventional  plant  
breeding  methods.  With  the  recent  developments  in  whole-genome  sequencing,  
molecular marker technology, and high-throughput phenotyping methods, it is now  
possible to develop breeding products in less time and in a more efficient manner.  
New  breeding  strategies  involving  genomic  selection  and  accelerated  breeding  
approaches are being adopted. Concerted efforts are being made at various leading  
rice research institutes worldwide to tackle the abovementioned drawbacks in rice  
production, productivity, nutritional quality, and resilience to various biotic and abi- 
otic stresses. Through this volume on Rice Improvement: Physiological, Molecular  
Breeding and Genetic Perspectives, an effort is made to put all the state-of-the-art  
technological accomplishments in rice physiology, molecular breeding, and genet- 
ics in one basket. We have included chapters from leading authors from various  
international institutes recognized for their rice improvement work. The chapters  
cover advances in rice genetics and breeding, and deep insights into rice physiology  
to  increase  assimilates  and  efficient  partitioning  of  the  photosynthates.  Detailed  
chapters cover Green Super Rice breeding technology, advances in two-line hybrid  
rice technology, and breeding of direct-seeded rice. Water is soon going to be the  
scarcest resource; therefore, another chapter covers growing rice with less water.  
Breeding for climate resilience is a universal goal among rice scientists globally;  
therefore,  other  chapters  explain  the  development  of  rice  with  climate  resilience  

                                                                                                 xi 

----------------------- Page 10-----------------------

xii                                                                                    Preface 

against heat, drought, cold, and heavy metal stress, written by subject matter experts.  
Molecular breeding for biotic stress tolerance such as disease and insect pest resis- 
tance is broadly discussed. Also, speeding up the fixation of segregating materials  
through doubled haploids is well covered to maximize genetic gains. Last but not  
least, the objective of breeding rice for high grain iron and zinc is dealt with com- 
prehensively in two chapters discussing recent updates on micronutrient biofortifi- 
cation of iron and zinc in rice to decrease malnutrition in women and children. This  
book will serve as a comprehensive reference material for rice researchers, teachers,  
and graduate students involved in rice improvement through physiological, molecu- 
lar, and genomic approaches for yield improvement and tolerance aiming for cli- 
mate resilience and increased nutritional quality. We express our sincere thanks and  
gratefulness to our esteemed authors. Without their determined efforts, this book  
project would not have been possible. We are also grateful to the Bill & Melinda  
Gates Foundation for providing funding for this project, from which this book will  
be an open access publication for the benefit of the scientific community and stu- 
dents. We would like to kindly thank Ms. Kristine Alexis Arellano for providing  
secretarial support for this book. We also acknowledge all the reviewers who helped  
to improve the chapters. We would like to thank Bill Hardy for meticulously editing  
all  the  chapters. We  appreciate  Springer  Nature  and  its  editorial  staff  for  timely  
completing the production process for this book. 

Metro Manila, Philippines                                                          Jauhar Ali  
Kashmir, Jammu and Kashmir, India                                      Shabir Hussain Wani   

----------------------- Page 11-----------------------

Contents 

  Advances in Genetics and Breeding of Rice: An Overview . . . . . . . . . . . . .        1 
E. A. Siddiq and Lakshminarayana R. Vemireddy 

  Strategies for Engineering Photosynthesis for Enhanced   
Plant Biomass Production  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      31 
Wataru Yamori 

  Green Super Rice (GSR) Traits: Breeding and Genetics for Multiple   
Biotic and Abiotic Stress Tolerance in Rice  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      59 
Jauhar Ali, Mahender Anumalla, Varunseelan Murugaiyan,   
and Zhikang Li 

  Advances in Two-Line Heterosis Breeding in Rice via the   
Temperature-Sensitive Genetic Male Sterility System  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      99 
Jauhar Ali, Madonna Dela Paz, and Christian John Robiso 

  Growing Rice with Less Water: Improving Productivity   
by Decreasing Water Demand . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    147 
Balwant Singh, Shefali Mishra, Deepak Singh Bisht, and Rohit Joshi 

  Crop Establishment in Direct-Seeded Rice: Traits, Physiology,   
and Genetics  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    171 
Fergie Ann Quilloy, Benedick Labaco, Carlos Casal Jr, and Shalabh Dixit 

  Genetics and Breeding of Heat Tolerance in Rice . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    203 
Changrong Ye, Xiaolin Li, Edilberto Redoña, Tsutomu Ishimaru,   
and Krishna Jagadish 

  Genetics and Breeding of Low- Temperature Stress   
Tolerance in Rice . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    221 
Sofi Najeeb, Anumalla Mahender, Annamalai Anandan,   
Waseem Hussain, Zhikang Li, and Jauhar Ali 

                                                                                                   xiii 

----------------------- Page 12-----------------------

xiv                                                                                        Contents 

  Arsenic Stress Responses and Accumulation in Rice . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    281 
Varunseelan Murugaiyan, Frederike Zeibig, Mahender Anumalla,   
Sameer Ali Siddiq, Michael Frei, Jayaseelan Murugaiyan,   
and Jauhar Ali 

  Molecular Approaches for Disease Resistance in Rice  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    315 
Mohammed Jamaloddin, Anumalla Mahender, C. Guru Gokulan,  
Chintavaram Balachiranjeevi, A. Maliha, Hitendra Kumar Patel,   
and Jauhar Ali 

  Molecular Approaches for Insect Pest Management in Rice  . . . . . . . . . . .    379 
Jagadish S. Bentur, R. M. Sundaram, Satendra Kumar Mangrauthia,   
and Suresh Nair 

  Doubled Haploids in Rice Improvement: Approaches,   
Applications, and Future Prospects . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    425 
Sanghamitra Samantaray, Jauhar Ali, Katrina L. C. Nicolas,   
Jawahar Lal Katara, Ram Lakhan Verma, C. Parameswaran,   
B. N. Devanna, Awadhesh Kumar, Byomkesh Dash,   
and Sudhansu Sekhar Bhuyan 

  Zinc-Biofortified Rice: A Sustainable Food- Based Product   
for Fighting Zinc Malnutrition  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    449 
Mark Ian C. Calayugan, B. P. Mallikarjuna Swamy, Chau Thanh Nha,  
Alvin D. Palanog, Partha S. Biswas, Gwen Iris Descalsota-Empleo,   
Yin Myat Myat Min, and Mary Ann Inabangan-Asilo 

  Biofortification of Rice Grains for Increased Iron Content  . . . . . . . . . . . .    471 
Jerlie Mhay Matres, Erwin Arcillas, Maria Florida Cueto-Reaño,   
Ruby Sallan-Gonzales, Kurniawan R. Trijatmiko,   
and Inez Slamet-Loedin 

Correction to: Crop Establishment in Direct-Seeded Rice:   
Traits, Physiology, and Genetics  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     C1 

Index . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    487 

----------------------- Page 13-----------------------

Abstract 

Rice  remains  the  staple  food  source  for  a  majority  of  the  global  population  and  
especially in Asia where 90 percent of rice is grown and consumed. Human popula- 
tion is rapidly increasing and by 2050, it is expected to reach 9.7 billion; therefore  
the  demand  for  increased  rice  production  needs  to  be  met  from  ever  reducing  
resources like land, water, and chemical inputs. In addition to the escalating demand,  
the changing climate scenario has increased several production constraints multi- 
fold that includes abiotic and biotic stresses. Rice researchers worldwide have been  
continuously making research efforts to provide technological solutions to counter  
the  above  challenges. Among  them,  the  ‘green  super  rice’  breeding  strategy  has  
been  successful  for  leading  the  development  and  release  of  multiple  abiotic  and  
biotic stress tolerant rice varieties for both favorable and unfavorable environments.  
Recent advances in plant molecular biology and biotechnologies have led to the  
identification and use of thousands of genes involved in biotic and abiotic stress  
tolerances over the last decade, which have opened up new vistas for increased rice  
production. Many of these are the regulatory genes regulating stress responses (e.g.,  
transcription factors and protein kinases) and functional genes that guard and main- 
tain  the  cell  (e.g.,  enzymes  for  generating  protective  metabolites  and  proteins).  
These genes are primarily used to augment the stress tolerance pathways in rice. In  
addition,  numerous  quantitative  trait  loci  (QTLs)  associated  with  elevated  stress  
tolerance have been cloned, resulting in the detection of considerably imperative  
genes for biotic and abiotic stress tolerance. Also, the molecular understanding of  
the genetic basis of traits such as N and P use is allowing rice researchers to engi- 
neer nutrient use efficient rice varieties, which would result in higher yields with  
lower inputs. Further, knowledge of the biosynthesis of micronutrients in rice per- 
mits  genetic  engineering  of  metabolic  pathways  to  enhance  the  availability  of  
micronutrients. Advances in genome sequencing tools have led to the improvement  
in rice molecular markers, their number was significantly increased, their physical  
order was deciphered, and closeness to annotated genes was valuable to forecast  

                                                                                           xv 

----------------------- Page 14-----------------------

xvi                                                                               Abstract 

gene-trait associations. Rice genome sequencing efforts over time will be rapidly  
scaled from the currently available 3000 to 10,000 genomes with the advancement  
of low cost third-generation sequencing techniques. This book on rice emphasizes  
on the quarters of rice science that are predominantly applicable to crack the fore- 
most limitations on rice production. It would bring out the advances in rice research  
in the fields of physiology, molecular breeding, and genetics, especially with a focus  
on increasing productivity, improving biotic and abiotic stress tolerance, and nutri- 
tional quality of rice. 

----------------------- Page 15-----------------------

Advances in Genetics and Breeding  
of Rice: An Overview 

E. A. Siddiq and Lakshminarayana R. Vemireddy 

Abstract  Rice (Oryza sativa L.) is life for more than half of the human population  
on Earth. In the history of rice breeding, two major yield breakthroughs or leaps  
occurred, which phenomenally revolutionized rice breeding: the Green Revolution  
in the 1960s and hybrid technology in the 1970s. However, the fruits of these tech- 
nologies have not spread globally to all rice-growing areas, especially African coun- 
tries, for diverse reasons. It is estimated that at least 50% more rice yield is needed  
to feed the anticipated nine billion people by 2050. This clearly warrants another  
breakthrough in rice. It is apparent that the currently used conventional and molecu- 
lar  marker-assisted  methods  need  to  be  updated  with  multi-pronged  approaches  
involving innovative cutting-edge technologies for achieving the next breakthrough  
in rice. Here, we attempt to discuss the exciting avenues for the next advances in  
rice breeding by exploiting cutting-edge technologies. 

Keywords  Rice · Green revolution · Hybrid rice · Multi-pronged approaches ·  
Gene editing 

1     Introduction 

Rice is the source for more than 20% of the total calorie intake for more than half of  
the  world  population.  More  than  90%  of  it  is  produced  and  consumed  in Asia.  
Chronically food-deficit Asia became self-sufficient in this crop by the early 1980s  
following the introduction and extensive adoption of high-yielding varieties with  
dwarf plant type starting in the mid-1960s. To sustain this self-sufficiency, it is esti- 
mated that the global rice requirement by 2050 will be 70% more than what is pro- 
duced now (Fig. 1). Meeting such a huge demand projection sustainably in the face  

E. A. Siddiq  
Institute of Biotechnology, Professor Jayashankar Telangana State Agricultural University,  
Hyderabad, India  

L. R. Vemireddy (*)  
Department of Genetics and Plant Breeding, SV Agricultural College, Acharya NG Ranga  
Agricultural University (ANGRAU), Tirupati, Andhra Pradesh, India 

© The Author(s) 2021                                                                             1 
J. Ali, S. H. Wani (eds.), Rice Improvement,  
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-66530-2_1 

----------------------- Page 16-----------------------

2                                                         E. A. Siddiq and L. R. Vemireddy 

              9 
              8                                    Next breakthrough ??? 
              7 
         )    6 
          a 
         h 
         /    5 
          t 
         ( 
         d    4 
         l 
          e 
         i    3 
          Y 
              2 
              1 
              0 

                  1970   1980   1990   2000   2010   2020   2030   2040   2050 

                                              Years 

Fig. 1   Rice yield trends and demand projections toward 2050 

of the shrinking favorable growth of the 1970s and 1980s, especially for natural  
resources such as arable land, irrigation water, and genetic resources, is the most  
challenging task ahead. This situation warrants the discovery of novel gene sources  
and innovative breeding-selection strategies to develop varieties that would enable  
the world to meet this challenge. 
   Systematic  breeding  for  the  improvement  of  Asian  rice  (Oryza  sativa  L.),  
although begun more than a century ago, has been witnessing rapid advances for the  
past 60 years, with landmark achievements in both applied and mission-oriented  
basic research. In keeping with the objective of this publication, “Molecular and  
physiological  breeding  strategies  toward  sustained  self-sufficiency  in  rice,”  this  
introductory chapter offers an overview of the significant achievements made dur- 
ing this period. 

2     First Breakthrough: The Green Revolution 

Raising the ceiling for genetic yield had been the major breeding objective until the  
1950s, when Chinese breeders succeeded with the first-ever dwarf variety, Guang-  
Chang- Ai, using the spontaneous dwarf mutant Ai-zi-zhan (Huang 2001), followed  
by  Taichung  (Native)-1  in  Taiwan  using  yet  another  spontaneous  dwarf  mutant,  
Dee-Gee-Woo-Gen. Impressed with its yield performance and period-bound matu- 
rity, the International Rice Research Institute (IRRI), using the same dwarfing gene  
source in a cross with tropical japonica  variety Peta, developed the miracle yielder,  
IR8, by the mid-1960s. The extensive adoption of this variety and its derivatives  
heralded Asia’s Green Revolution. Dwarf stature, inherited as a simple recessive  
trait, together with a set of favorable physiological traits such as increased leaf area  

----------------------- Page 17-----------------------

Advances in Genetics and Breeding of Rice: An Overview                                      3 

index (LA1), photo-insensitivity, higher harvest index, and higher fertilizer respon- 
siveness, enabled rice breeders worldwide to develop hundreds of “IR8 plant type”  
varieties combining the desired maturity range and grain quality. Thus, the DGWG  
dwarfing gene (sd1) provides short stature in more than 90% of the high-yielding  
dwarf  varieties  being  planted  globally  in  the  past  50  years.  The  dwarf  varieties  
developed for the relatively risk-free irrigated ecosystem are not adapted to rainfed  
upland and lowland ecosystems, which account for more than 45% of global rice  
area (Mackill et al.  1996). Efforts to raise the genetic yield of temperate japonica   
and  African  rice  varieties  through  the  same  plant  type  strategy  employing  the  
DGWG dwarfing gene, however, did not succeed except for limited success achieved  
through  variety Tongil  in  South  Korea.  Understanding  that  germplasm  of  indica  
origin would not be of help to achieve the plant type goal, the United States and  
Japan used dwarfing gene sources of spontaneous and induced origin identified in  
the respective germplasm. Designated as sd2 and sd3, and found to be non-allelic to  
sd1 of DGWG, they have been extensively employed in breeding for higher genetic  
yield in American and Japanese varieties. 

3     Second Breakthrough: Hybrid Rice Technology 

Ever since the first yield breakthrough achieved through dwarf plant type varieties,  
keeping in view the need to meet huge future demand projections, especially under  
limited scope for horizontal growth, breeders have been looking for strategies that  
would enable them to make a second yield breakthrough. The search took place amid  
reservations that the chances of finding one such strategy would be difficult as the  
physiological limit for genetic yield in terms of sink-source equilibrium had already  
been reached through dwarf varieties. However, this notion was soon proved wrong  
when Chinese breeders succeeded in the commercial exploitation of hybrid vigor in  
self-pollinated rice in the late 1970s. Of the more than 20 different cytoplasmic male  
sterility (CMS) sources, researchers discovered only Wild Abortive (WA), suiting  
indica rice, and Boro Tai (BT) in japonica  rice, which are widely used for commer- 
cial hybrid seed production (Li and Yuan 2000; Fuji and Toriyama 2009). More than  
90% of the hybrids cultivated in China are based on WA cytosterility (Sattari et al.  
2007). The yield advantage of about 15% over the best high- yielding dwarf varieties  
marked the second major yield breakthrough. The adoption of hybrid technology  
exceeding  18  million  ha  in  a  short  period  of  10–12  years  enabled  China  to  add  
20 million tons annually to its rice production. Sadly, this proven technology could  
not be replicated sufficiently in countries outside China. Among the reasons for the  
slow adoption of the technology, the still unsatisfactory yield advantage, inconsistent  
yield performance, less acceptable grain quality, and non-suitability of many variet- 
ies for the long wet season in countries such as India and Bangladesh are important.  
Given the recent successes achieved in parental line improvement, some of these  
deficiencies could be rectified in future hybrids and thereby the pace of adoption of  
the technology is expected to increase in the coming years. 

----------------------- Page 18-----------------------

4                                                                 E. A. Siddiq and L. R. Vemireddy 

    With the less attractive yield advantage being one of the major limitations against  
hybrid  rice,  various  breeding  strategies  have  been  attempted  across  countries  to  
raise  yield  vigor.  Among  them,  the  shift  from  excessively  depending  on  intra-  
 subspecific combinations (indica/indica or japonica/japonica) to inter-subspecific  
 (indica/tropical  japonica  or  indica/japonica)  combinations  has  been  rewarding.  
The persistent sterility characteristic in indica/japonica hybrids has been overcome  
following the discovery and use of sterility neutralizing wide compatibility gene  
                                                                    n 
 (WCG) loci. Using an early discovered WCG such as S 5 obtained from traditional  
varieties  such  as  Dular,  Keta  Nanga,  and  others,  many  indica-japonica  hybrids  
 (Liangyou Pei9, Xieyou 9308, etc.) with yield surpassing that of intra-subspecific  
hybrids have been developed. Success achieved in overcoming the sterility problem  
in inter-subspecific hybrids through the use of WCG loci prompted rice geneticists  
to search for more such genes, leading to the discovery of as many as 50 loci for  
hybrid  fertility.  Of  these,  some  were  identified  in  inter-subspecific  crosses  of  
 O. sativa while others were found in crosses between O. sativa and other species of  
the genus  Oryza (Ouyang et al.  2009). Among the loci causing female sterility in  
inter-subspecific hybrids,  S5 is a major locus (Song et al.  2005). The locus with  
three alleles—indica allele S5-i, japonica  allele S5-j, and neutral allele S5-n—has  
been mapped on chromosome 6 (Yanagihara et al. 1995). The tightly linked flanking  
markers of the  S5 gene, RM253 and RM276, have been found quite valuable in  
developing appropriate parents for producing sterility-free inter-subspecific hybrids  
 (Singh et al. 2006; Siddiq and Singh 2005). Pyramiding of S5-n and f5 -n genes was  
also  demonstrated  to  cumulatively  improve  percentage  seed-setting  in  indica-  
japonica  hybrids (Mi et al. 2016). Priyadarshi et al. (2017) successfully introgressed  
                                                n 
a major gene for wide compatibility (S5 ) into the maintainer line IR58025B through  
marker-assisted breeding. 
    Yet another development toward strengthening hybrid rice technology has been  
hybrid seed production by environment-sensitive genic male sterility (EGMS) using  
a  two-line  approach  as  an  alternative  to  conventional  cytoplasmic  male  sterility  
using three-line breeding. This was possible following the discovery of photoperiod-  
 sensitive male sterility (PGMS) gene sources such as NK58s, PMS1, PMS3, and  
TMS5, and their non-sensitive gene sources such as Annong IS, Norin12, SA2, and  
F61 (Siddiq and Ali 1999; Ali 1993; Ali et al. 1995). Dispensing with the need for a  
male sterility maintainer line, the EGMS system enables the use of a large number  
of  varieties  as  male  parents  and  thereby  increases  the  probability  of  identifying  
more heterotic hybrids. Finding the two-line breeding strategy more efficient and  
economical in the past three decades, many EGMS system–based two-line hybrids  
with higher yield, improved grain quality, and resistance to major biotic stresses  
have been released for commercial planting in China. Now, approximately three mil- 
lion ha are planted to two-line hybrids in China. It is a good sign that interest is  
growing for the two-line approach in countries such as Vietnam and in multinational  
 seed companies such as RiceTec Inc. Many of the TGMS lines, including SA2 and  
F61 identified in India, have been linked with robust microsatellite markers enabling  
the  rapid  development  of  inter-subspecific  hybrids  (Reddy  et  al.  2000;  Hussain  
et al. 2011). 

----------------------- Page 19-----------------------

Advances in Genetics and Breeding of Rice: An Overview                                                                                       5 

4        Next Breakthrough: Strategies 

After the grand success of the first and second breakthroughs, in the form of semi-  
dwarf varieties and hybrid technology, the yield levels of rice have almost reached  
stagnation. However, the basic understanding of trait inheritance has been enhanced  
tremendously with the advances in cutting-edge molecular technologies. The next  
breakthrough requires a multipronged approach involving diverse disciplines and  
methods (Fig. 2). The following are some of the concepts or pilot studies that have  
potential to achieve the next breakthrough in rice yield improvement. 

4.1         Enrichment of the Rice Gene Pool  

The most important prerequisite for progressive crop improvement is the availabil- 
ity of genetic variability. Most crop plants are endowed with rich variability and rice  
is no exception. Wild/weedy species, landraces, modern cultivars, induced mutants,  
etc. constitute the major source of variability. Despite such rich diversity, more than  
80% of current rice cultivars owe their making to a few parental lines. Strong sexual  
barriers make it difficult to introgress genes of interest from distant relatives and the  
possibility of introducing undesirable traits into cultivars via linkage drag dissuaded  
breeders all along from resorting to the strategy of wide hybridization. As a result,  
85–90% of the variability remains unused in landraces and wild/weedy relatives.  
Given the rising need for additional/novel variability to meet the unfolding chal- 
lenges, strategies to bring out the hidden genes in distant rice gene pools and induce  
variation are inevitable. Whereas association mapping, sequence-based mapping,  
etc. have been found rewarding in bringing out still undiscovered variability lying in  
the natural gene pool, induced (CRISPR) and inserted (activation tagging) muta- 
gens could help generate novel variability (Wei et al. 2013). 

4.2        Discovery and Stacking of Yield Genes Hidden in Wild/Weedy Species 

Wild-weedy gene pools are rich reservoirs of gene sources for breeders looking to  
progressively improve crop plants and rice is no exception. Aside from finding and  
using several Mendelian genes largely governing resistance to biotic stresses, the  
search for genes/QTLs governing polygenically controlled yield and its major com- 
ponents began on the assumption that many of these genes/QTLs might not have  
been captured in modern varieties during the course of evolution of rice and they  
could still remain in the wild gene pool (Xiao et al. 1996). If they could be identified  
by  QTL  mapping  and  the  harmonious  ones  stacked  in  the  current  high-yielding  
varieties by marker-assisted breeding, genetic yield could be further increased. This  

----------------------- Page 20-----------------------

                                                                           First breakthrough 
                                                                Introduction of semidwarf varieties                                                                                   6 

                                                                            Green Revolution 

                                                                         Second breakthrough 
                                                                         Hybrid rice technology 

                                          Strategies                                                         Cutting-edge tools 

                                      Enrichment of the                                                    NGS-based QTL mapping 
                                      gene pool 

                                                                                                          Marker-assisted breeding 
                                      Exploitation of  
                                      wild species/Landraces 
                                                                                                                   Genomic selection 
                                      Designing of                                     Next  
                                      plant architecture                         breakthrough  

                                                                                                                                                                                     E 
                                                                                                                      Genome editing 
                                                                                                                                                                                     . 
                                      Exploring                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                                                                                                                     A 
                                                                                                                                                                                     . 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
                                      alternate dwarf genes                                                                                                                          S 
                                                                                                                                                                                     i 
                                                                                                                                                                                     d 
                                                                                                                              SNP Chips                                              d 
                                                                                                                                                                                     i 
                                                                                                                                                                                     q 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
                                      Engineering                                                                                                                                    a 
                                                                                                                                                                                     n 
                                      starch biosynthesis                                                                                                                            d 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
                                                                                                                                                                                     L 
                                                                                                                     High throughput                                                 .  
                                                                                                                                                                                     R 
                                                                                                                                                                                     . 
                                                                                                                          phenotyping                                                  
                                                                                                                                                                                     V 
                                      Enhancing the  
                                                                                                                                                                                     e 
                                      photosynthesis                                                                                                                                 m 
                                                                                                                                                                                     i 
                                                                                                                                                                                     r 
                                                                                                                                                                                     e 
                                                                                                                                                                                     d 
                                                                                                                                                                                     d 
                                                                                                                                                                                    y 

Fig. 2   Strategies and cutting-edge tools to achieve the next breakthrough in rice yield enhancement 

----------------------- Page 21-----------------------

Advances in Genetics and Breeding of Rice: An Overview                                                                        7 

followed the successful mapping and validation of two yield QTLs, yld 1.1 and yld  
2.1, in O. rufipogan by the marker-associated QTL approach by Cornell University,  
USA (Xiao et al.  1996). Worldwide interest was aroused among rice geneticists to  
search for more and more yield genes/QTLs in wild/weedy relatives and primitive  
cultivars, resulting in the identification of many promising yield QTLs in O. rufipo- 
gan, O. nivara, and landraces (Marri et al. 2005; Kaladhar et al. 2008; Swamy and  
Sarla 2008; Sudhakar et al. 2012; Swamy et al. 2011, 2012, 2014). This pioneering  
work culminated in the development of higher-yielding varieties such as Jefferson  
using yld2.1 from  O. rufipogan (Imai et al.  2013), DRR Dhan 40 involving yield  
genes/QTLs  derived  from  O.  nivara  (Haritha  et  al.  2017),  and  the  high-yielding  
salinity-tolerant  IET21943  based  on  a  yield  QTL  from  O.  rufipogon  (Ganeshan  
et al. 2016) (Table 1). 

4.3       Designing of Plant Architecture or Ideotype Breeding  

On the strength of findings from simulation modeling, IRRI physiologists believed  
that the potential yield of 10 t/ha achieved through dwarf varieties could be further  
increased  by  25%  (Dingkuhn  et  al.  1991)  through  enhancement  of  biomass/unit  
area without altering the harvest index (≈45%). This prompted IRRI breeders to  
conceptualize and tailor a morpho-physiologically more efficient new plant type  
(NPT) suited to high-density planting. Characterized by less profuse tillering habit,  
long and upright top leaves, heavy panicles, and robust and active root system, the  

Table 1   List of wild species/landraces used for trait enhancement in rice 

 Donor species                    Recipient species              Trait transferred                 Reference 
 Oryza rufipogon                  Oryza sativa                   Yield                             Xiao et al. ( 1996) 
 O. glumaepetula                  O. sativa                      Yield                             Brondani et al. (2002) 
 O. grandiglumis                  O. sativa                      Yield                             Ahn et al. (2003) 
 O. rufipogon                     O. sativa                      Yield                             Liang et al. (2004) 
 Landrace (FR13A)                 O. sativa (Swarna)             Submergence tolerance             Xu et al. (2006) 
 O. nivara                        O. sativa (Swarna)             Yield and contributing            Swamy and Sarla  
 (IRGC81848)                                                     traits                            (2008) 
 O. nivara (KDML                  O. sativa                      BPH resistance (Bph3)             Jairin et al. (2010) 
  105)                            (Rathuheenathi) 
 Landrace (Basmati                O. sativa                      Fragrance and amylase             Yi et al. (2009) 
 370)                             (Manawthukha)                  content 
 O. rufipogon (IRGC               O. sativa                      Blast resistance                  Hirabayashi and Sato  
  104814)                         (Koshihikari)                                                    (2010) 
 Landrace (FL 478)                O. sativa (AS 996)             Salt tolerance                    Luu et al. (2012) 
 O. rufipogon (Coll-4)            O. sativa (B 29-6)             Blast resistance (Pi9)            Ram and Majumder  
                                                                                                   (2007) 
 Landrace (Tetep)                 O. sativa (PRR78)              Blast resistance (Pi54)           Singh et al. (2012) 
 O. meridionalis                  O. sativa                      Blast resistance (Pi-cd)          Fujino et al. (2019) 

----------------------- Page 22-----------------------

8                                                                            E. A. Siddiq and L. R. Vemireddy 

NPT  lines  developed  at  IRRI  have  been  reported  to  yield  11–12  t/ha  vis-à-vis  
 13–14  t/ha  reportedly  achieved  by  Chinese  breeders  in  indica/tropical  japonica  
hybrids in the further improved NPT background (Yuan and Fu  1995). 

4.4       Designing of Shoot and Panicle Architecture  

Evidence suggests that, by altering shoot and panicle architecture, genetic yield can  
be substantially increased. Shoot architecture includes traits that affect plant height  
and leaf length, width, and thickness, whereas panicle architecture involves traits  
that affect panicle number, panicle length, number of grains per panicle, and grain  
weight. With precise information available on the mapping positions of QTLs and  
access to many cloned genes for the key traits, it is now possible to design the archi- 
tecture  of  the  rice  plant  by  pyramiding  appropriate  QTLs/genes. The  genes  that  
control  grain  number  (Gn1a,  Ghd7,  DEP1,  and  WFP),  grain  weight  (GS3  and  
GW2), grain filling (GIF1), grain size (GS3 and GW5), and panicle number (DEP1  
and  WFP) are fortunately located on different chromosomes, which would enable  
combining favorable genes/QTLs easily into elite varietal backgrounds. 
     Earlier,  many  researchers  showed  that  pyramiding  of  multiple  yield-related  
genes enhanced yield significantly. Ashikari et al. (2005) were successful in increas- 
ing grain number by 45% and decreasing plant height by 20% by combining the  
grain number QTL (Gn1a) and the semi-dwarfing gene (sd1) by a pyramiding strat- 
egy. Later, Ando et al. (2008) reported that a pyramided near-isogenic line (NIL)  
containing two QTLs (qSBN1 for secondary branch number on chromosome 1 and  
qPBN6 for primary branch number on chromosome 6) developed by introgressing a  
QTL from Habataki (indica) into Sasanishiki (japonica ) produced more spikelets  
than  the  independent  NIL  harboring  the  QTLs  qSBN1  and  qPBN6.  Further,  this  
pyramided line (qSBN1 +  qPBN6) showed 4–12% higher yield than the recurrent  
parent Sasanishiki because of greater translocation of carbohydrates from stem to  
panicle (Ohsumi et al. 2011). Wang et al. (2012a, b) also demonstrated that the pyra- 
mid line (qHD8 + GS3) had higher yield potential, longer grains, and more suitable  
heading date than the recipient parent, Zhenshan97. 
     In addition to gene pyramiding with the aid of marker technology, some success- 
ful attempts have been made to increase yield through genetic engineering of plant  
architecture traits. One such effort employed light-regulated overexpression of the  
Arabidopsis  phytochrome  A  gene  by  Cornell  University  (Garg  et  al.  2006).  
Phytochromes  are  a  family  of  red/far  red  light-absorbing  photoreceptors,  which  
control plant development and plant metabolic activities. The group demonstrated  
that, by splicing the Arabidopsis PHY A gene into rice by employing light-regulated  
tissue-specific rbc promoter, plant stature could be altered by further decreasing the  
height of the already semi-dwarf variety and simultaneously increasing the number  
of productive tillers, resulting in significantly higher yield than for the control vari- 
ety. In another study, Wang et al. (2015) reported that transgenic rice plants express- 
ing  the  Arabidopsis  phloem-specific  sucrose  transporter  (AtSUC2),  which  loads  

----------------------- Page 23-----------------------

Advances in Genetics and Breeding of Rice: An Overview                                                           9 

sucrose into the phloem under control of phloem protein2 promoter (pPP2), showed  
 16% higher grain yield than the wild type in field trials. Park et al. (2017) demon- 
strated overexpression of the gene OsGS to improve redox homeostasis by enhanc- 
ing  the  glutathione  pool,  which  resulted  in  greater  tolerance  of  environmental  
stresses in addition to higher grain yield and total biomass. 

4.5      Modification of Root Architecture  

Genetic improvement of the root system is important for developing tailor-made  
varieties tolerant of abiotic stresses. A deeper, thicker, and more branched root sys- 
tem with high root to shoot ratio is usually preferred for plants to withstand drought  
stress. Although drought tolerance has been extensively investigated for the past few  
decades,  an  in-depth  study  to  understand  its  genetics  and  breeding  behavior  has  
hardly been attempted because of its complex nature and the tedious work involved  
in phenotyping of the root system. However, it is known that rice germplasm is rich  
in variability for root traits and that the root system and related traits are governed  
by many genes with small effects, often regarded as QTLs. Now, more than 600  
QTLs have been identified for various root-related traits (www.gramene.org). Of the  
 162  functionally  characterized  root-related  genes,  most  are  annotated  as  being  
related to transport and transcriptional or hormonal regulation. The vast majority  
(98%) of these genes have been identified through reverse-genetic approaches and,  
of these, only three (PSTOL1, DRO1, and Bet1) identified based on natural allelic  
variation affecting phenotype. Despite such a large number of QTLs available, only  
two related to nutrient uptake, PSTOL1 at the Pup1 locus (Chin et al. 2010) and the  
root length QTL qRL6.1 that governs nitrate uptake from deeper soil layers (Obara  
et al. 2010), have been used. 
    The recent development of several non-invasive 2D and 3D root imaging systems  
has enhanced our ability to accurately observe and quantify architectural traits in  
complex whole-root systems. Coupled with the powerful marker-based genotyping  
and sequencing platforms currently available, root phenotyping technologies lend  
themselves to large-scale genome-wide association studies, and can speed up the  
identification and characterization of the genes and pathways involved in root sys- 
tem development. 

4.6        Green Super Rice for Sustainable Performance 

As a massive breeding effort placing emphasis on developing ecologically and eco- 
nomically  sustainable  varieties  in  high-yield  backgrounds  for  resource-poor  rice  
farmers  in Asia  and Africa,  the  Green  Super  Rice  (GSR)  Project  was  launched  
jointly by the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation, Chinese Academy of Agricultural  
Sciences,  and  IRRI.  The  breeding  strategy  consists  of  developing  advanced  

----------------------- Page 24-----------------------

10                                                                        E. A. Siddiq and L. R. Vemireddy 

backcross populations involving selected popular high-yielding varieties (40–50)  
chosen from major rice-growing countries as recurrent parents and around 500 vari- 
eties with traits of unique adaptive value as donors. Advanced backcross genera- 
tions (BC F ) are then screened under targeted stress conditions for transgressive 2 2 
segregants exceeding the respective parents and local checks in their trait perfor- 
mance. This is followed by pyramiding of complex trait-specific non-allelic QTLs  
of promise derived from different donor sources into country-specific popular vari- 
eties such as IR64, BR11, BG300, and Huang-Hua-Zhan. The recovery of promis- 
ing  lines  in  large  numbers  is  attributed  to  the  harmonious  complementation  of  
genetic networks for complex traits, which otherwise are incomplete in both parents  
(Ali et al. 2012). While the breeding emphasis of the GSR strategy is for developing  
eco-friendly/farmer-friendly varieties/hybrids, the massive exercise is bound to pro- 
duce as well super-yielding varieties/hybrids. 

4.7      Physiological Breeding Approaches  

Exploring Alternative  Sources  of  Dwarfing  Genes                          Given  the  experience  with  
maize (corn) in the United States, that genetic uniformity for even one gene would  
make any crop plant vulnerable to a sudden outbreak of any pest, rice breeders have  
been apprehensive of such an eventuality due to the widespread and excessive use  
of  the  dwarfing  gene  sd1  in  rice  breeding,  thus  warranting  diversification  of  the  
dwarfing gene. In rice, as many as 192 dwarfing genes are known. They include  
both  dominant/semi-dominant  and  recessive  inheritance:  D53,  Ssi1,  Sdd(t),  Dx,  
TID1,  LB4D,  Slr-f,  D-h,  d13,  Sdt97,  etc.  (http://shigen.nig.ac.jp/rice/oryzabase).  
Dwarf mutants characterized at the molecular level have been found for their short  
stature as a result of defective signal transduction molecules such as heterotrimeric- 
 G protein (Ueguchi-Tanaka et al. 2000), homeobox-like OSH15 (Sato et al.  1999),  
brassinosteroids  (Yamamuro  et  al.  2000),  and  various  GA  biosynthesis  genes  
(Sasaki et al. 2002; Itoh et al. 2004). 

    The sd1 gene-based modern semi-dwarf varieties, aside from being short in stat- 
ure, are associated with some pleiotropic effect on other traits that reportedly include  
decreased spikelet number and grain weight (Murai et al. 2002), decreased root length  
(Lafitte et al. 2007), and poor response to applied nutrients (Zhang et al. 2013). Yet  
other research underway is looking for a novel allele of sd1 that would be devoid of  
such negative effects on yield components and thereby help develop a dwarf plant  
type variety with still higher potential yield. Differing from the traditional tall-statured  
native varieties, wherein the GA pathway remains intact vis-à- vis the modern semi- 
dwarf varieties, wherein the GA pathway has been suppressed (GA-repressed), an  
allele of sd1 or some other height-reducing genetic mechanism that would affect the  
GA pathway (GA-independent) might help to find a new yield threshold. A novel and  
valuable dwarfing gene, asd-1 (alternate semi-dwarf gene), was identified on chromo- 
some 1 employing a QTL-seq approach (Gopalakrishna et al. 2017). 

----------------------- Page 25-----------------------

Advances in Genetics and Breeding of Rice: An Overview                                        11 

Engineering  of  Starch  Biosynthesis          The  first  yield  breakthrough  achieved  in  
semi-dwarf rice took place through partitioning of photosynthate in favor of grains  
while the second occurred through an NPT variety that enabled an increase in bio- 
mass by manipulating crop geometry but not by enhanced photosynthesis. Recent  
findings reveal the possibilities of redirecting biosynthetic pathways through recom- 
binant DNA technology enabling plants to produce more or altered quality of natu- 
ral  products  such  as  starch,  protein,  and  lipids.  It  is  now  possible  to  manipulate  
source-sink equilibrium either by overexpression of endogenous or heterologous  
enzymes or by down-regulation of endogenous enzymes by using gene silencing  
techniques. 

    Manipulation of ADP glucose pyrophosphorylase (ADPGPPase), the key rate-  
limiting allostearic enzyme in the biosynthetic pathway of starch, for instance, is  
regarded as a potential strategy to improve yield and starch quality in cereal crops.  
This enzyme catalyzes glucosyl phosphate into ADP glucose, which is the precursor  
of starch. Down-regulation of the gene encoding the enzyme by an antisense RNA  
approach resulting in a drastic decrease in its activity as well as starch accumulation  
was the first report to establish the crucial role of the enzyme in starch biosynthesis  
(Lin et al. 1988). The observed increase in starch yield due to antisense inhibition of  
resident ADPGPPase proved the key regulatory function of the enzyme. Following  
this report, many researchers explored the possibility of raising yield in other crops  
by manipulating the enzyme. Believing that natural variability in sink components  
would be a reflection of the varied behavior of the enzyme, an effort was made to  
study  the  extent  of  variability  in  the  nature  of  the  enzyme  in  rice. The  findings  
revealed  enzyme  activity  (total  and  specific),  its  response  to  effectors  (activator  
3PGA and inhibitor Pi), gene expression (transcription), and starch synthesis (total  
and rate of accumulation) to vary with the genotype and stage of development of the  
endosperm.  Overall  evaluation  suggests  that  the  highest  yielding  varieties  and  
highly heterotic hybrids are the most promising in nearly all respects of the enzyme  
behavior (Devi et al. 2010). More intensive further study of wild/weedy species and  
ecotypes from different rice ecosystems might result in valuable sources for effi- 
cient ADPGPPase for exploitation by even conventional recombination breeding. 

Enhancement of Photosynthesis            Enhancement of photosynthetic efficiency could  
be one of the potential means for raising the yield ceiling in rice. In C  rice, CO  is 3    2 
assimilated  into  a  3-carbon  compound  by  the  enzyme  ribulose-1,5-bisphosphate  
carboxylase/oxygenase (Rubisco). This enzyme also catalyzes oxidation of RuBP  
in a wasteful process known as photorespiration, which results in a loss of as much  
as 25% of the previously fixed carbon. At temperatures above 30 °C, which are typi- 
cal of tropical rice-growing areas, the rate of oxygenation increases substantially  
and this considerably decreases the photosynthetic efficiency of C  plants by up to 3 
40% (Ehleringer and Monson  1993). On the contrary, C  plants have very much 4 
decreased rates of photorespiration and thus are adapted to thrive in hot and dry  
environments; this offers valuable insights for yield improvement strategies. Rice  
with  a  C   photosynthesis  mechanism  would  have  increased  photosynthetic  effi-4 
ciency while using scarce resources such as land, water, and fertilizer (specifically  

----------------------- Page 26-----------------------

12                                                                          E. A. Siddiq and L. R. Vemireddy 

nitrogen) more effectively (Hibberd et al.  2008). As it would perform well under  
high temperature and require less water and nitrogen, C  rice would benefit varied 4 
rice ecosystems, including marginal lands. Engineering the photosynthetic pathway  
of C  rice into a C  plant is quite a challenging and time-consuming task. The main 3 4 
challenge of converting the photosynthetic pathway of a C  plant into that of a C  3                                4 
plant lies in decreasing photorespiration and modifying the leaf canopy (anatomy).  
IRRI, through an ambitious collaborative project (International C  Rice Consortium) 4 
involving advanced countries/laboratories, is engaged in converting C  rice into a C  3                             4 
plant by introducing appropriate genes from maize and other C  plant species. The 4 
C  pathway genes such as CA (carbonic anhydrase), PEPC (phosphoenolpyruvate 4 
carboxylase),  PPDK  (PEP  carboxykinase),  NADP-ME  (NADP-dependent  malic  
enzyme), and NADP-MDH (NAD-dependent malate dehydrogenase) cloned from  
maize are being engineered into rice. Also, the transporters that were overexpressed  
in  the  C   metabolic  pathway  such  as  2-oxoglutarate/malate  transporter  (OMT1), 4 
dicarboxylate  transporter1  (DiT1),  dicarboxylate  transporter2  (DiT2),  PEP/phos- 
phate transporter (PPT1), mesophyll envelope protein (MEP), and triose-phosphate  
phosphate translocator (TPT) and that were identified through proteomics of maize  
bundle sheath and mesophyll cells (Friso et al.  2010) were transformed into rice.  
Models show that increased water and nitrogen use efficiencies from this engineer- 
ing effort could result in yield increases of 30% to 50% (Karki et al. 2013). Wang  
et al. (2017a, b), in their theoretical analysis of biochemical and anatomical factors,  
demonstrated  that  integrating  a  C   metabolic  pathway  into  rice  leaves  with  a  C  4                       3 
metabolism and mesophyll structure may lead to increased photosynthesis under  
current ambient CO  concentration. Also, they concluded that the partitioning of 2 
energy between C  and C  photosynthesis and the partitioning of Rubisco between 3 4 
mesophyll and bundle sheath cells would be decisive factors controlling photosyn- 
thetic efficiency in an engineered C –C  leaf.3        4 

    In  yet  another  attempt  to  enhance  photosynthesis  and  thereby  genetic  yield,  
Ambavaram  et  al.  (2014)  identified  a  master  regulator,  HYR  (HIGHER YIELD  
RICE),  a  transcription  factor  associated  with  photosynthetic  carbon  metabolism  
(PCM).  It  directly  activates  the  photosynthetic  pathway  genes  and  other  down- 
stream  genes  involved  in  PCM  and  yield  stability  under  drought  and  high-  
temperature  environmental  stress  conditions.  Haritha  et  al.  (2017)  reported  wild  
introgressions from O. rufipogon to increase the photosynthetic efficiency of KMR3  
rice lines. 

4.8      Defending Against Biophysical Stresses  

Hardly any crop plant is challenged by diverse biotic and abiotic stresses as rice is.  
The crop is vulnerable to more than one dozen pathogens and as many insect pests,  
many of which exist in virulent/viruliferous races/biotypes. As for abiotic stresses,  
diverse stressful water regimes in rainfed lowlands, moisture-deficit rainfed uplands,  
coastal saline and inland sodic soils, temperature extremes, etc. constitute the major  

----------------------- Page 27-----------------------

Advances in Genetics and Breeding of Rice: An Overview                                     13 

stresses, covering 45% of the world’s rice area. Climate change is yet another threat  
to agriculture in general and rice in particular. 

Breeding for Resistance to Biotic Stresses        Since the introduction of high- yielding  
semi-dwarf  varieties,  diseases  and  insect  pests  have  been  increasingly  causing  
severe yield losses year after year. Among pathogens, blast, bacterial leaf blight,  
sheath blight, and Rice Tungro Virus (RTV), and insect pests yellow stem borer,  
brown planthopper, leaf folder, and gall midge are the most devastating. Management  
of  these  pests  has  been  largely  through  resistance  breeding,  taking  advantage  of  
race-/biotype-specific resistance genes identified in the gene pool and the adoption  
of rational gene deployment strategies. Frequent breakdown of resistance in multi-  
racial/multi-biotype  pests  has  made  pest  management  all  the  more  difficult  and  
challenging. 

Breeding  for  Resistance  against  Diseases          Rice  blast  caused  by  the  fungus  
Magnaporthe oryzae is the most widespread and devastating disease of rice. Existing  
in as many as 30 races, it has been managed for many decades mainly by resistance  
breeding  using  more  than  100  resistance  genes  identified  in  the  rice  gene  pool.  
Nevertheless, the disease is still a challenge because of the frequent breakdown of  
resistance   warranting   the   need   for   varieties   with   broad-spectrum   resistance.  
Pyramiding of genes matching region-specific races was chosen as the strategy to  
manage the problem and molecular marker technology has been found handy in this  
effort. Following the pioneering attempts to introgress resistance genes (Pi1, Pi-5,  
Piz, and  Pita) by marker-assisted backcross breeding into varieties such as Co39  
(Hittalmani et al. 2000), IR50 (Narayanan et al. 2002), and Zhenshan 97A (Liu et al.  
2003), this strategy is being adopted globally to make varieties stable against the  
disease. 

   Bacterial leaf blight (BLB), caused by Xanthomonas oryzae pv. oryzae (Xoo), is  
the most serious disease worldwide and it causes yield losses up to 70%. Based on  
analyses of phenotypic responses to Xoo races and molecular mapping results, 41  
genes (29 dominant and 12 recessive) conferring resistance to the disease have been  
registered  in  the  Oryzabase  database  (www.shigen.nig.ac.jp/rice/oryzabase/gene/ 
list). Additionally, some R genes/alleles have been generated by mutation breeding.  
They include nine isolated genes (Xa1, xa5, xa13, Xa21, Xa23, xa25, Xa26/Xa3,  
Xa27, and xa41) and nine fine-mapped genes (Xa2, Xa4, Xa7, Xa22, Xa30, Xa33,  
Xa38,  Xa39,  and  Xa40)  (www.shigen.nig.ac.jp/rice/oryzabase/gene/list).  In  addi- 
tion  to  such  Mendelian  genes,  QTLs  for  resistance  have  been  reported.  Many  
pathotype-specific resistance genes linked to molecular markers have been success- 
fully used for selective improvement of popular high-yielding quality rice varieties  
such  as  BPT5204  (Samba  Mahsuri)  introgressed  with  Xa21 ,  xa13,  and  xa5  
(Sundaram  et  al.  2008)  and  Pusa  Basmati-1  introgressed  with  Xa21  and  xa13  
(Joseph  et  al.  2004).  The  strategy  of  marker-assisted  introgression  of  dominant  
genes (Xa4, Xa7, and Xa21) against BLB has been extended as well to the parental  
lines of popular hybrids (Borines et al. 2000; Zhang et al. 2006). Recently, Hajira  
et al. (2016) developed a single-tube, functional marker-based multiplex PCR assay  
for simultaneous detection of the major BLB resistance genes Xa21 , xa13, and xa5  

----------------------- Page 28-----------------------

14                                                             E. A. Siddiq and L. R. Vemireddy 

in  rice.  Pyramiding  diverse  resistance  genes  against  any  disease  is  considered  a  
promising strategy for ensuring broad-spectrum resistance and slowing down the  
breakdown of resistance. As for the choice of gene sources, many of those accessed  
from  wild/weedy  germplasm  appear  to  be  of  multi-racial/multi-pathotype  resis- 
tance. For instance, Xa21, which provides resistance to as many as 30 pathotypes  
and shows synergism with country-/region-specific critical resistance genes, is from  
O. longistaminata, an African A-genome species, while Xa30 and Xa31 , offering  
resistance to many pathotypes, are from O. nivara, and Xa34 is from O. rufipogon.  
Better understanding of the molecular mechanisms underlying bacterial pathogen- 
esis that has revealed the role of several factors facilitating infection and progres- 
sion of the disease might pave the way in the near future to the development of an  
effective and environmentally safe strategy to manage BLB. 
    Rice Tungro Virus (RTV), the most dreaded disease induced by mixed infection  
of Rice Tungro Bacilliform Virus (RTBV) and Rice Tungro Spherical Virus (RTSV),  
is transmitted by green leafhopper. Screening of a large number of rice germplasm  
accessions reveals many traditional varieties to be resistant to RTSV and only a few  
to RTBV (Shim et al.  2015). RTSV resistance is a recessive trait controlled by a  
translation initiation factor4 gamma (eIF4G) located on chromosome 7 (Lee et al.  
2010). A few years ago, an RTSV resistance gene was transferred to japonica  rice  
by marker-assisted selection (Shim et al. 2015). Initially, the disease was managed  
by host-plant resistance breeding using a few accessions as donors. Recent studies  
show  that  the  RNA  interference  (RNAi)  technique  would  be  more  effective  and  
could be used to develop virus-resistant transgenic rice. Le et al. (2015) generated  
transgenics  capable  of  producing  small  interfering  RNA  specific  against  RTSV  
sequences. In order to develop transgene-based resistance against RTBV, Valarmathi  
et  al.  (2016)  used  the  ORF  IV  gene  by  RNA-interference  in  rice  variety  Pusa  
Basmati-1, and the transgene was subsequently introgressed into ASD 16, a variety  
popular in southern India, by marker-assisted breeding. 
    Against sheath blight (ShB), which was once a minor disease but is now a major  
one, no source of resistance has as yet been found. However, as many as 50 QTLs  
with moderate resistance have been mapped. Several studies have reported candi- 
date genes for resistance such as chitinase, glucanase, glutathione S-transferase, and  
kinase protein to be within the mapped QTL region (Yadav et al. 2015). Although  
most of the sheath blight resistance QTLs identified so far are of only limited effect  
on ShB, reports showing an expected level of resistance were not uncommon. For  
instance, Zuo et al. (2007) reported introgression of the QTL qSB-11LE to decrease  
grain loss by 10.71% in the background of variety Lemont under severe disease  
conditions  in  field  trials.  Pinson  et  al.  (2005)  predicted  qSB-9TQ  and  qSB-3TQ  to  

decrease crop loss due to the disease by 15% when introduced into the same variety.  
Wang et al. (2012a, b) found pyramiding of diverse sheath blight resistance QTLs  
such as qSB9-2 and qSB12-1 to increase resistance. Interestingly, Zuo et al. (2014)  
reported that pyramiding of the QTLs qSB-9TQ and  TAC1TQ, governing stem borer  

resistance and tiller angle (TA), respectively, improved resistance to ShB. Thus, in  
the absence of R genes, pyramiding of ShB moderate resistance QTLs and of other  
QTLs governing unrelated traits/stresses could be worth attempting as an alternative  
strategy to manage the disease, as reported by Zuo et al. (2014). In addition to such  

----------------------- Page 29-----------------------

Advances in Genetics and Breeding of Rice: An Overview                                       15 

host resistance-based strategies, a transgenic approach through inhibition of chitin  
metabolism in fungi such as  Rhizoctonia solani, by expression of rice  chitinase,  
could be a strategy for controlling the disease. Karmakar et al. (2017) demonstrated  
that transgenics overexpressed with constructs pyramided with two genes, OsCHI11  
(chitinase gene) and AtNPR1 (Arabidopsis NPR1), were superior to a single-gene  
cassette in enhancing sheath blight tolerance. 

Breeding for Resistance against Insect Pests             Rice hosts more than one dozen  
insect pests, of which stem borer, brown planthopper, white backed planthopper,  
leaf  folder,  and  gall  midge  cause  serious  yield  losses.  The  host-plant  resistance  
available in abundance against all the major insect pests and their biotypes with the  
exception of stem borer and leaf folder has enabled breeders to manage them so far  
by  sequentially  releasing  resistant  varieties  matching  newly  emerging  biotypes.  
Nevertheless, the emergence of newer and increasingly viruliferous biotypes requir- 
ing matching resistance gene sources, occurrence of more than one pest/biotype in  
any given region, and still no way to find resistance gene sources against yellow  
stem borer and leaf folder have made insect pest management a challenging task.  
Given  the  limitations  of  the  conventional  breeding-selection  approaches,  more  
rational gene deployment such as molecular marker-aided resistance gene pyramid- 
ing and introgression of novel alien genes by recombinant DNA technology are now  
employed/contemplated for effective management of insect pest problems. Many of  
the insect pest-/biotype-specific resistance genes have been mapped and linked to  
closely placed markers. For engineering resistance, many different insecticidal pro- 
teins and molecules known to be highly selective in their action against a given pest,  
causing no harm to non-target organisms, are being experimented with. Among the  
widely  used  genes  encoding  insecticidal  proteins/molecules  against  rice  insect  
pests,  endotoxin  crystal  proteins  of  Bacillus  thuringiensis,  digestive  enzyme-  
specific  protease  inhibitors,  plant  lectins,  α  amylase  inhibitors,  insect  chitinases,  
and insecticidal viruses are important. Of these, Bt toxin genes (cry IA, cry IB, cry  
IC, etc.) and protease inhibitors (cowpea serine P1) against stem borer and lectin  
protein gene  (gna, asa lectin) against hoppers have been reported to be effective.  
Advances made in managing various insect pests are presented hereunder. 

    Yellow stem borer (Scirpophaga incertulas) (Walker) is the most important  
insect pest globally in rice-producing areas. As there are no strong host-resis- 
tance gene sources against it, genetic engineering approaches have been attempted  
and found promising. Datta et al. ( 1996) and Nayak et al. ( 1997) were the first to  
report transformation of rice with the Bt gene against yellow stem borer. Since  
then, several workers have successfully engineered rice with different Bt genes  
(cry IA(b), cry IA(c), and cry IAb) alone as well as in fusion forms against the  
pest. Liu et al. (2016) pyramided two foreign genes, cry1Ac driven by rice Actin  
I  promoter   and      lysine-rich    protein   (LRP)     driven   by   endosperm-specific  
GLUTELIN1 (GT1) promoter, into elite  indica cultivar 9311. In the pyramided  
line,  cry1Ac has been found to efficiently express in leaves and stems against  
striped stem borer (Chilo suppressalis Walker) under laboratory conditions and  
against    rice  leaf   folder   (Cnaphalocrocis       medinalis     Guenee)     under    field  

----------------------- Page 30-----------------------

16                                                           E. A. Siddiq and L. R. Vemireddy 

conditions. Despite such success stories elsewhere, including in China, Spain,  
Pakistan, etc., Bt rice is yet to be deregulated for commercial planting. 
   Brown  planthopper  (BPH),  Nilaparvata  lugens  Stål,  has  been  a  threat  to  rice  
production in Asia since the advent of high-yielding varieties. Experience with its  
management shows host-plant resistance to be the most efficient and sustainable  
strategy. As of now, 31 BPH resistance genes have been identified in cultivars and  
wild species and all except bph5 and bph8 have been mapped to various chromo- 
somes of rice. To date, 13 BPH resistance genes (Bph14, Bph3, Bph15, Bph26/2,  
bph29, Bph18, Bph9/1/7/10/21, and Bph32) have been identified and characterized  
via a map-based cloning approach (Jing et al. 2017). Many of the genes have been  
introduced  alone  or  in  combination  into  modern  rice  varieties/parental  lines  of  
hybrids by marker-assisted selection. Wang et al. (2017a, b) pyramided Bph6 and  
Bph9 into elite restorer line 93-11, while Fan et al. (2017) developed three broad-  
spectrum BPH-resistant restorer lines by pyramiding big-panicle gene Gn8.1, BPH  
resistance genes Bph6 and Bph9, and fertility restorer genes Rf3, Rf4, Rf5, and Rf6  
through molecular marker-assisted breeding. 
   Besides the gene pyramiding strategy to develop broad-spectrum hopper- resistant  
varieties,  genetic  engineering  approaches  have  been  attempted.  For  instance,  
Nagadhara et al. (2004) successfully engineered Chaitanya variety with gna lectin  
protein and another variety with onion/garlic lectin (asa lectin) (Saha and Majumder  
2006). To  develop  durable  resistance  against  BPH,  green  leafhopper,  and  white- 
backed planthopper, ASACI and GNA protein genes have been pyramided by cross- 
ing single-gene-based transgenic lines. The lines developed so far have been found  
to surpass in their level of resistance in all three hoppers vis-à-vis single-gene-based  
transgenics (Rao et al.  1998). 
   Asian rice gall midge (GM) (Orseolia oryzae Wood-Mason) is a serious pest in  
rice-growing countries, especially in China, India, and Sri Lanka. To date, 11 GM  
resistance genes (Gm1, Gm2, gm3, Gm4, Gm5, Gm6, Gm7, Gm8, Gm9, Gm10, and  
Gm11(t)) have been identified and characterized. As for their pyramiding to realize  
broad-spectrum resistance against more than one biotype, Nair et al. (2011) demon- 
strated that stacking of Gm1 with any one of the genes in group II, which exclude  
Gm4 and  Gm7, would confer resistance to five biotypes (GMB1, GMB2, GMB3,  
GMB5, and GMB6). To cover all the biotypes, at least three genes, preferably Gm1,  
Gm2, and Gm4, would be required. 
   Rice  leaffolder  (RLF)  (Cnaphalocrocis  medinalis  Guenee)  is  another  major  
insect pest. Developing RLF-resistant lines in rice through conventional breeding  
has  been  a  challenge  due  to  the  non-availability  of  a  host-plant  resistance  gene.  
Alternatively, genetic engineering has been attempted by introducing heterologous  
insecticidal genes. Manikandan et al. (2016) succeeded in developing transgenic  
rice resistant to the pest with codon optimized synthetic cry2AX1 gene fused with a  
rice  chloroplast  transit  peptide  sequence.  In  another  report,  Chakraborty  et  al.  
(2016) demonstrated that transgenic rice expressing the  cry2AX1 gene conferred  
resistance to multiple lepidopteran pests, including RLF. Pradhan et al. (2016) also  
reported transgenic rice expressing vegetative insecticidal protein (Vip) of Bacillus  
thuringiensis to show broad insecticidal properties. 

----------------------- Page 31-----------------------

Advances in Genetics and Breeding of Rice: An Overview                                17 

Breeding for Tolerance of Abiotic Stresses       Among abiotic stresses that severely  
depress productivity, drought, submergence, and salinity are important. The plant’s  
ability to withstand such stresses results from the cumulative effects of a network of  
physiological and biochemical functions. Negative effects of abiotic stresses include  
broadly stress-imposed homeostasis imbalance, disruption of growth and metabolic  
activities, and generation of cell-damaging reactive oxygen species (ROS). At the  
molecular level, plants under abiotic stresses adapt to the conditions by triggering a  
cascade of events that start with stress perception and end with the expression of a  
battery of genes of adaptive response. Adaptation at the molecular level is through  
restoration  of  homeostasis  (ion  and  osmotic  gradient),  control  of  damage,  and  
detoxification of ROS. Knowledge of the genetics governing these stresses is a pre- 
requisite for finding solutions to the problem. Unlike resistance to biotic stresses  
that largely follows a Mendelian mode of inheritance, tolerance of abiotic stresses  
is quite complex and polygenically controlled. Added to the inadequate knowledge  
of genetics, a lack of reliable and reproducible screening/selection techniques has  
made breeding all the more challenging, despite having sources of resistance in the  
rice gene pool. As a result, more than 60% of the global rice area, especially in the  
rainfed ecosystem does not have as yet high-yielding varieties ideally suited to this  
harsh environment. For the past 15 years, advances in plant molecular biology have  
provided breeders with a variety of genomic tools and resources capable of over- 
coming the technological constraints that have been impeding progress in finding  
genetic solutions to such stresses. 

   Of the estimated huge future rice demand, most production has to come from  
rainfed lowland and upland rice ecosystems, where drought is the major yield con- 
straint. Unlike the irrigated ecosystem, no truly high-yielding varieties are adapted  
to drought stress. In drought-prone parts of the world, farmers have no option but to  
grow traditional low-yielding but well-adapted varieties. All efforts to develop high-  
yielding drought-tolerant varieties by using traditional drought-tolerant varieties as  
donor sources proved a futile exercise. This is largely on account of the genetically  
complex nature of drought tolerance and dependence on phenotype-based selection.  
Major indices of tolerance QTLs now mapped and linked to robust markers have  
made genotype-based selection and pyramiding of varieties with tolerance QTLs  
easy and efficient. 
   Several  QTLs  relating  to  different  parameters  of  drought  tolerance  such  as  
osmotic adjustment, cell membrane stability, relative water content, root character- 
istics, and stress recovery as well as yield per se under stress have been mapped and  
linked to robust markers. Among the traits that govern drought tolerance, the direct  
measure of grain yield under drought rather than its component traits is promising.  
As of now, a large number of QTLs governing grain yield under drought (DTY)  
have been identified, such as qDTY12.1, qDTY3.1, qDTY6.1, qDTY2.2, and qDTY9.1.  
The various combinations of these DTY QTLs resulted in an average yield advan- 
tage of 300–500 kg/ha under stress conditions. For instance, the major-effect QTL  
qDTY12.1 has been introgressed into Vandana and it has a yield advantage of about  
500 kg/ha over its donor parent under reproductive-stage stress (Kumar et al. 2014).  

----------------------- Page 32-----------------------

18                                                        E. A. Siddiq and L. R. Vemireddy 

Similar success has been achieved by introgressing the QTL qDTYs into drought-  
susceptible  mega-variety  IR64  (Swamy  and  Kumar  2013). Two  QTLs  (qDTY3.2  
and  qDTY12.1) with large effects for grain yield under drought have been trans- 
ferred into Sabitri, a popular variety of Nepal, through marker-assisted breeding  
(Dixit et al. 2017). Many more QTLs have been identified for yield under drought  
conditions and they are being transferred to the background of popular high- yielding  
varieties such as Swarna, IR64, Vandana, Sabitri, TDK1, Anjali, Samba Mahsuri,  
MRQ74, MR219, Jinmibyeo, Gayabyeo, Hanarumbyeo, and Sangnambatbyeo by  
marker-assisted breeding at IRRI and other centers. Besides these DTY QTLs, Uga  
et al. (2013) reported that the QTL Deeper Rooting 1 (DRO1) increased root growth  
angle in rice, leading to higher yield under drought conditions. 
   Given the availability of many novel genes conferring high tolerance of the stress  
along with efficient transformation-regeneration protocols in place, genetic engi- 
neering for drought tolerance has been found to be a distinct possibility. Candidate  
genes used with some success in rice are trehalose (tps) cloned from Arabidopsis ,  
trehalose-6-phosphate synthase, and trehalose-6-phosphate phosphatase (tps1) from  
yeast, pyrroline carboxylate synthase (P5cb) from  Vigna aconitifolia, chloroplast  
glutamine synthetase (GS2) from rice, and choline oxidase (glycine-betaine synthe- 
sis)  (cod  A)  from  Arthrobacter  globiformis .  Among  the  regulatory  genes,  DRE  
binding protein (dreb1α), calcium-dependent protein kinase (OsCDPK7), and those  
identified with cellular-level tolerance such as helicases (PDH45) and APZ/ERF  
family DREB transcription factors are important (Saijo et al.  2000; Sahoo et al.  
2012; Rashid et al. 2012). 
   Although many sources of tolerance of salt stress are available in native germ- 
plasm such as SR26B, Nona Bokhra, and Pokkali, efforts to combine the desired  
level of tolerance in high-yield backgrounds by conventional breeding yielded no  
tangible results. Convinced of the potential of molecular marker-assisted breeding  
and gene transfer technology, possibilities have been explored to find genetic solu- 
tions to the problem. As no single QTL/gene could provide the desired level of tol- 
erance,  pyramiding  of  genes  for  tolerance-related  morpho-physiological  features  
(Na and Cl exclusion, K uptake, N/K ratio, and tissue tolerance) and biochemical  
pathways (glyoxalase, abscisic acid, proline, glycine-betaine, and polyamine) has  
been  employed.  More  than  80  salt-tolerance  QTLs  with  large  effects  have  been  
mapped so far. Of these, Saltol mapped in Pokkali is a major one and it has already  
been transferred to high-yielding varieties such as BR11, BRRI dhan28, IR64, and  
AS996 (Babu et al. 2017). 
   The  genetic  engineering  strategy  is  based  on  genes/enzymes  involved  in  the  
pathways of (a) osmosis homeostatic balance, wherein ion and osmatic gradient are  
restored; (b) detoxification by scavenging of ROS; and (c) stress damage control  
restoring growth and metabolic activities. Transgenics with relevant salt-tolerance  
genes obtained from various sources have been reported to adapt well to and survive  
in saline soils. Many important genes conferring salt tolerance belong to the salt  
overly sensitive (SOS) pathway. Of the several candidate and regulatory genes over- 
expressed  in  rice,  calcium-dependent  protein  kinase  (Os  CDPK),  a  transcription  
factor, choline oxidase (cod A) involved in glycine-betaine synthesis, chloroplast  

----------------------- Page 33-----------------------

Advances in Genetics and Breeding of Rice: An Overview                                  19 

glutamine synthetase (GS2), pyrroline carboxylate synthetase, etc. are some of the  
successfully employed sources. Expression of two genes of the glyoxalase pathway,  
glyI and glyII, preferably together, has been shown to confer tolerance of salinity  
(Singla-Pareek et al. 2006). Overexpression of several stress-induced genes, includ- 
ing helicases, has been shown to provide tolerance of the stress in rice. Sahoo et al.  
(2012) have demonstrated pea DNA helicase 45 to promote salinity tolerance in  
IR64 with higher yield. 
   Flash floods causing submergence are the major yield-depressing factor in rain- 
fed shallow lowland rice. Depending on the growth stage and period under water,  
crop damage could vary from 10 to 100%. Unlike traditional tall varieties such as  
FR13A and FR43B, which are known to adapt to submergence, short-statured high-  
yielding varieties suffer the most, even when the period of submergence is not even  
a few days. Hence, farmers in the rainfed lowland ecosystem prefer traditional vari- 
eties, not minding their low productivity. Despite years of effort to breed submer- 
gence tolerance into high-yield backgrounds using FR13A-like donor sources, no  
progress could be made. This was largely due to the lack of precise knowledge of  
the  genetics  of  submergence  tolerance  per  se  and  of  the  morpho-physiological  
parameters that govern it and the non-reliability of phenotype-based selection under  
stress conditions. The major QTL identified in flood-tolerant landrace FR13A and  
designated as Sub1, which explains 70% of the phenotypic variance, was mapped  
onto chromosome 9. A joint international effort involving NRRI and NDUAT in  
India, BRRI in Bangladesh, University of California-Davis in the United States, and  
IRRI began for the characterization and use of the QTL in marker-assisted breeding  
for developing submergence-tolerant varieties. Dissection of the QTL revealed it to  
be  a  cluster  of  three  genes  encoding  ethylene  responsive  factors  designated  as  
Sub1A, Sub1B, and Sub1C. Of these, Sub1A was identified as the key gene confer- 
ring tolerance of submergence. Two alleles of Sub1A, Sub1A-1 (tolerance specific)  
and Sub1A-2 (intolerance specific) were identified with a single nucleotide poly- 
morphism changing proline to serine (Septiningsih et al. 2009). Swarna selectively  
introgressed with Sub1A was formally released for general cultivation as Swarna-  
Sub1A  in  India  (Odisha,  Uttar  Pradesh,  etc.),  Bangladesh,  the  Philippines,  and  
Indonesia. The  Sub1A gene has also been deployed into Thai fragrant rice Khao  
Dawk Mali 105 and rice restorer line Wanhui 6725 (Luo et al. 2016). This was prob- 
ably the first example of a biotech product ever developed for abiotic stress condi- 
tions by marker-assisted breeding in rice. 

Enrichment of Nutritive Quality        Enrichment of nutritive quality is as important  
as yield enhancement on account of people in Asia depending on rice for a sizable  
part of their nutritional requirement. Because about one-half of the global popula- 
tion is suffering from one or more nutrient deficiency–related health disorders and  
more than three million children die each year because of malnutrition, there is a  
need and urgency to pay due attention to the nutritive quality in rice. 

   Among the nutritional limitations of rice, low protein content (PC) is the fore- 
most. Nevertheless, the need to raise the protein content received no serious atten- 
tion from breeders after experiencing early failures. Following the identification of  

----------------------- Page 34-----------------------

20                                                          E. A. Siddiq and L. R. Vemireddy 

high-protein donor sources, despite the complex inheritance and the earlier reported  
negative  relationship  between  yield  and  protein  content,  breeders  have  started  
believing that high protein content could be combined with high yield. By using  
ARC10075 as a donor, CR Dhan310 (IET24780) with PC of 11% and rich in threo- 
nine and lysine content has been developed and released for general cultivation in  
India (Mahender et al. 2016). Although many efforts have been made for developing  
marker-assisted  breeding  for  high  PC,  success  has  so  far  been  eluded.  Xu  et  al.  
(2017) were successful in developing transgenic rice with enhanced high-quality  
protein content by expressing the AmA1 gene from Amaranthus sp. 
   Vitamin deficiency–related health disorders are widespread in third world coun- 
tries. Vitamin A deficiency causing vision impairment is especially rampant. In the  
absence of exploitable natural variability, in all food grains except maize, alternative  
strategies have to be found. Professor Ingo Potrykus of the Federal Institute of Plant  
Sciences,  Switzerland,  jointly  with  Professor  Peter  Beyer  of  the  University  of  
Freiburg, Germany, succeeded in raising β carotene content by an ingenious genetic  
engineering strategy. The strategy lay in restoring three critical genes that are miss- 
ing in the isoprenoid pathway of carotene synthesis by accessing them from daffodil  
(phytoene synthase (psy ), phytoene desaturase (pds ), and lycopene cyclase (lyc)),  
and the bacterium Erwinia uredovora (carotene desaturase,  crt1) (Ye et al. 2000).  
So, the transformed rice popularly known as Golden rice, although a great scientific  
achievement, accumulates far less (1.6 mg/g) beta carotene. Understanding that it  
was due to the use of relatively less efficient daffodil gene psy encoding phytoene  
synthase, the multinational biotech company Syngenta succeeded in increasing the  
content of β carotene by several fold (37 mg/g) by using the psy gene cloned from  
maize (Paine et al. 2005). Sadly, the Golden rice developed close to 20 years ago has  
yet to be deregulated for commercial planting because of regulatory hurdles. 
   As for mineral nutrients, iron and zinc are the most crucial as their deficiency is  
the main cause of malnutrition. Modern high-yielding varieties are low in these two  
mineral nutrients. On average, Fe content in polished rice is 2 mg/kg vis-à-vis the  
recommended dietary intake for humans of 10–15 mg/kg. In the case of Zn, males  
within the age bracket of 15–74 years require on average 12–15 mg/day vis-à-vis  
68 mg/day required for females (Mahender et al. 2016). Conventional breeding for  
developing Fe-enriched rice has not progressed to the desired extent due to limited  
variability  for  Fe  content  in  polished  rice.  Evaluation  of  more  than  20,000  rice  
accessions  from Asia,  Latin America,  and  the  Caribbean  for  Fe  and  Zn  content  
revealed a maximum of only 8 mg/kg in polished grains. This is because most of the  
Fe and Zn are concentrated in the aleurone and sub-aleurone layers of rice kernels,  
and is lost upon polishing. Taking advantage of Zn-rich donor sources, under the  
HarvestPlus project, the Bangladesh Rice Research Institute in collaboration with  
IRRI  developed  and  released  two  Zn-enriched  (19  and  24  mg/kg)  varieties. The  
Indian Institute of Rice Research, Hyderabad, has as well succeeded in developing  
three rice varieties (DRR Dhan 45, DRR Dhan 48, and DRR Dhan 49) with high Zn  
content: 22.3, 20.91, and 26.13 mg/kg, respectively (Rao et al. 2020). Many low to  
moderate Zn QTLs have now been mapped in the germplasm. In addition, genome-  
wide association mapping and QTL mapping enabled the identification of several  

----------------------- Page 35-----------------------

Advances in Genetics and Breeding of Rice: An Overview                                 21 

loci associated with grain Fe and Zn content (Norton et al. 2014; Swamy et al. 2018;  
Calayugan et al. 2020). 
   Transgenic approaches to enhance Fe content in rice grains were first explored  
more than a decade ago. Since then, attempts have been made to increase Fe content  
in rice endosperm by overexpressing the genes involved in Fe uptake from soil and  
those involved in translocation from aerial parts to grains. Among these studies, a  
concomitant increase in Fe and Zn content in rice grains was obtained by overex- 
pression or activation of NAS (nicotianamine synthase) genes, either  in solo or in  
combination with other transporters or Fe storage genes. Constitutive expression of  
OsNAS2 has been reported to result in increased Fe content (19 mg/kg) and Zn con- 
centration (76 mg/kg) in polished rice grains (Johnson et al. 2011). 

4.9     Selective Modification of Traits by Gene Editing 

Aside from the marker-assisted introgression of genes of interest discussed in the  
foregoing, an alternative genetic engineering approach for selectively transforming  
crops with targeted genes has opened up yet another molecular strategy known as  
genome editing. Genome editing tools such as TALENs (Transcription Activator-  
Like Effector Nucleases) and CRISPR/Cas9 (Clustered Regularly Interspaced Short  
Palindromic Repeats) enable selective interchange of genes of interest. Considered  
as a non-transgenic method, products thereby are devoid of any foreign material in  
their  final  product  DNA.  Employing  these  techniques,  targeted  gene  editing  for  
important traits is on the rise. TALENs, for instance, have been used for enhancing  
seed storability and herbicide resistance in rice by precisely editing the LOX3 gene  
(Ma et al. 2015) and acetolactate synthase gene (OsALS) (Li and Liu 2016), respec- 
tively. Likewise, CRISPR/Cas9 has been used to manipulate traits such as herbicide  
resistance (Xu et al. 2014), yield components (Li et al. 2016), blast resistance (Wang  
and Wang 2016), TGMS line development (Zhou et al. 2016), stomatal development  
(Yin and Biswal 2017), and modifying amylose content (Sun et al. 2017; Perez et al.  
2019) (Table 2). 

5     Conclusions 

For predominantly rice-consuming Asia to emerge and remain a food-/nutrition-  
secure continent, sustained self-sufficiency is crucial. Meeting future demand pro- 
jections  sustainably  is  the  challenging  task  in  the  face  of  shrinking  natural  
resources—arable land area, irrigation water, genetic variability—and the inevitable  
adverse effects of climate change. For the next breakthrough to meet future food  
demand  projections,  it  seems  imperative  to  exploit  advanced  cutting-edge  tools,  
which enables development of high yielding, nutrient rich and input-use-efficient  
designer rice varieties.  

----------------------- Page 36-----------------------

22                                                                   E. A. Siddiq and L. R. Vemireddy 

Table 2   Targeted editing of important genes employing genome editing techniques 

                                                                     Gene editing  
 Trait                                      Targeted gene            method               Reference 
 Herbicide resistance (resistance to        BEL                      CRISPR-Cas9          Xu et al.  
 bentazon and sulfonylurea                                           system               (2014) 
 herbicides) 
 Improvement of seed storability            LOX3                     TALENs               Ma et al.  
                                                                                          (2015) 
 Regulators of grain number, panicle        Gn1a, DEP1, GS3,         CRISPR/Cas9          Li et al.  
 architecture, grain size, and plant        and IPA1                 system               (2016) 
 architecture 
 Herbicide resistance                       Acetolactate             TALENs               Li and Liu  
                                            synthase gene                                 (2016) 
                                            (OsALS) 
 Blast resistance                           OsERF922                 CRISPR/Cas9          Wang and  
                                                                                          Wang (2016) 
 TGMS line development                      TMS5                     CRISPR/Cas9          Zhou et al.  
                                                                                          (2016) 
 Stomatal development                       EPFL9                    CRISPR/Cas9          Yin et al.  
                                                                     and CRISPR/          (2017) 
                                                                     Cpf1 
 High amylose content                       SBEI and SBEII           CRISPR/Cas9          Sun et al.  
                                                                                          (2017) 
 Low amylase content                        GBSS                     CRISPR/Cas9          Perez et al.  
                                                                                          (2019) 

References 

Ahn SN, Kwon SJ, Suh JP, Kang KH, Kim HJ, Hwang HG, Moon HP (2003) Introgression for  
    agronomic  traits  from  O  grandiglumis  into  rice,  O  sativa.  In:  Mew TW,  Brar  DS,  Peng  S,  
    Dawe D, Hardy B (eds) Rice science: innovations and impact for livelihood. International Rice  
    Research Institute (IRRI), Los Baños, pp 265–274 
Ali J (1993) Studies on temperature sensitive genic male sterility and chemical induced steril- 
    ity  towards  development  of  two-line  hybrids  in  rice  (Oryza  sativa  L.).  PhD  thesis,  Indian  
    Agricultural Research Institute, New Delhi 
Ali J, Siddiq EA, Zaman FU, Abraham MJ, Ahmed IM (1995) Identification and characterization  
    of temperature-sensitive genic male sterile sources in rice (Oryza sativa L). Indian J Genet  
    55:243–259 
Ali J, Xu JL, Gao Y, Fontanilla M, Li Z (2012) Enhanced productivity across different rice ecolo- 
    gies through green super Rice (GSR) breeding strategy. International Dialogue on Designer  
    Rice for Future, ICRISAT, Hyderabad, 9–10 July 2012 
Ambavaram MMR, Basu S, Krishnan A, Ramegowda V, Batlang U, Rahman L, Baisakh N, Pereira  
    A (2014) Coordinated regulation of photosynthesis in rice increases yield and tolerance to envi- 
    ronmental stress. Nat Commun 5:5302. https://doi.org/10.1038/ncomms6302 
Ando T, Yamamoto T, Shimizu T et al (2008) Genetic dissection and pyramiding of quantitative  
    traits for panicle architecture by using chromosomal segment substitution lines in rice. Theor  
    Appl Genet 116(6):881–890. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00122- 008- 0722- 6 
Ashikari M, Sakakibara H, Lin S, Yamamoto T, Takashi T, Nishimura A, Angeles ER, Qian Q,  
    Kitano  H,  Matsuoka  M  (2005)  Cytokinin  oxidase  regulates  rice  grain  production.  Science  
    309(5735):741–745. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1113373 

----------------------- Page 37-----------------------

Advances in Genetics and Breeding of Rice: An Overview                                            23 

Babu NN, Krishnan SG, Vinod KK, Krishnamurthy SL, Singh VK, Singh MP, Singh R, Ellur RK,  
    Rai V, Bollinedi H, Bhowmick PK, Yadav AK, Nagarajan M, Singh NK, Prabhu KV, Singh AK  
    (2017) Marker aided incorporation of Saltol, a major QTL associated with seedling stage salt  
    tolerance, into Oryza sativa ‘Pusa Basmati 1121’. Front Plant Sci 8:41. https://doi.org/10.3389/ 
    fpls.2017.00041 
Borines LM, Veracruz CM, Redoña ED, Hernandez JF, Natural MP, Raymundo AD, Leung H  
    (2000) Marker aided pyramiding of bacterial blight resistance genes in maintainer lines for  
    hybrid rice production. International Rice Research Institute Conference Abstract 4:162 
Brondani C, Rangel PHN, Brondani RPV, Ferreira ME (2002) QTL mapping and introgression of  
    yield-related traits from Oryza glumaepatula to cultivated rice (Oryza sativa L.) using micro- 
    satellite makers. Theor Appl Genet 104:1192–1203 
Calayugan MIC, Formantes AK, Amparado A et al (2020) Genetic analysis of agronomic traits and  
    grain iron and zinc concentrations in a doubled haploid population of rice (Oryza sativa L.). Sci  
    Rep 10:2283. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598- 020- 59184- z 
Chakraborty M, Reddy PS, Mustafa G, Rajesh G, Narasu VM, Udayasuriyan V, Rana D (2016)  
    Transgenic rice expressing the cry2AX1 gene confers resistance to multiple lepidopteran pests.  
    Transgenic Res 25(5):665–678. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11248- 016- 9954- 4. Epub 2016 Mar 26 
Chin HJ, Lu X, Haefele SM, Gamuyao R, Ismail AM, Wissuwa M, Heuer S (2010) Development  
    and application of gene-based markers for the major rice QTL Phosphate uptake 1 (Pup1).  
    Theor Appl Genet 120:1073–1086 
Datta K, Torrizo L, Oliva N, Alam MF, Wu C, Abrigo E, Vasquez A, Tu J, Quimia C, Alejar M,  
    Nicola Z, Khush GS, Datta SK (1996) Production of transgenic rice by protoplast, biolistic and  
   Agrobacterium systems. In: Proceedings of the fifth international symposium on rice molecular  
    biology. Yi Sein Publishing Co., Taipei, pp 159–167 
Devi T, Anjana N, Sarla B, Siddiq EA, Sirdeshmukh R (2010) Activity and expression of adenos- 
    ine diphosphate glucose pyrophosphorylase in developing rice grains: varietal differences and  
    implications on grain filling. Plant Sci 178:123–129 
Dingkuhn  M,  Penning  de Vries  FWT,  De  Datta  SK,  van  Laar  HH  (1991)  Concepts  for  a  new  
    plant type for direct seeded flooded tropical rice. Selected papers from the International Rice  
    Research conference, Seoul, Korea, 27–31 August 1990 
Dixit S, Yadaw RB, Mishra KK, Kumar A (2017) Marker-assisted breeding to develop the drought-  
    tolerant version of Sabitri, a popular variety from Nepal. Euphytica 213:184 
Ehleringer JR, Monson RK (1993) Evolutionary and ecological aspects of photosynthetic pathway  
    variation. Annu Rev Ecol Syst 24:411–439 
Fan F, Li N, Chen Y, Liu X, Sun H, Wang J, He G, Zhu Y, Li S (2017) Development of elite BPH-  
    resistant wide-spectrum restorer lines for three and two line hybrid rice. Front Plant Sci 8:986.  
    https://doi.org/10.3389/fpls.2017.00986 
Friso G, Majeran W, Huang MS, Sun Q, van Wijk KJ (2010) Reconstruction of metabolic path- 
    ways, protein expression, and homeostasis machineries across maize bundle sheath and meso- 
    phyll chloroplasts: large-scale quantitative proteomics using the first maize genome assembly.  
    Plant Physiol 152:1219–1250 
Fuji S, Toriyama K (2009) Suppressed expression of Retrograde-Regulated Male Sterility restores  
    pollen fertility in cytoplasmic male sterile rice plants. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 106:9513–9518.  
    https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0901860106 
Fujino K, Hirayama Y, Obara M, Ikegaya T (2019) Introgression of the chromosomal region with  
    the  Pi-cd locus from  Oryza meridionalis into  O. sativa L. during rice domestication. Theor  
    Appl Genet 132:1981–1990 
Ganeshan P, Jain A, Parmar B, Rao AR, Sreenu K, Mishra P, Mesapogu S, Subrahmanyam D,  
    Ram T, Sarla N, Rai V (2016) Identification of salt tolerant rice lines among interspecific BILs  
    developed by crossing Oryza sativa × O. rufipogon and O. sativa × O. nivara. Aust J Crop Sci  
    10(2):220–228 
Garg AK, Sawers RJ, Wang H et al (2006) Light-regulated overexpression of an Arabidopsis phyto - 
    chrome A gene in rice alters plant architecture and increases grain yield. Planta 223(4):627–636.  
    https://doi.org/10.1007/s00425- 005- 0101- 3 

----------------------- Page 38-----------------------

24                                                                 E. A. Siddiq and L. R. Vemireddy 

Gopalakrishna  K, Vemireddy  LR,  Srividhya A,  Nagireddy  R,  Jena  SS,  Gandikota  M,  Patil  S,  
    Veeraghattapu R, Deborah DAK, Reddy GE, Shake M, Dasari A, Ramanarao PV, Durgarani  
    CV, Neeraja CN, Siddiq EA, Sheshumadhav M (2017) QTL-Seq-based genetic analysis iden- 
    tifies a major genomic region governing dwarfness in rice (Oryza sativa L.). Plant Cell Rep  
    37(4):677–687. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00299- 018- 2260- 2 
Hajira SK, Sundaram RM, Laha GS, Yugander A, Balachandran SM, Viraktamath BC, Sujatha  
    K, Balachiranjeevi CH, Pranathi K, Anila M, Bhaskar S, Abhilash V, Mahadevaswamy HK,  
    Kousik M, Dilip Kumar T, Harika G, Rekha G (2016) A single-tube, functional marker-based  
    multiplex  PCR  assay  for  simultaneous  detection  of  major  bacterial  blight  resistance  genes  
    Xa21 , xa13 and xa5 in rice. Rice Sci 23(3):144–151 
Haritha G, Vishnukiran T, Yugandhar P, Sarla N, Subrahmanyam D (2017) Introgressions from  
    Oryza rufipogon increase photosynthetic efficiency of KMR3 rice lines. Rice Sci 24(2):85–96 
Hibberd JM, Sheehy JE, Langdale JA (2008) Using C4 photosynthesis to increase the yield of  
    rice: rationale and feasibility. Curr Opin Plant Biol 11(2):228–231. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
    pbi.2007.11.002 
Hirabayashi H, Sato H (2010) Development of introgression lines derived from  Oryza rufipogon  
    and O. glumaepatula in the genetic background of japonica cultivated rice (O. sativa L.) and  
    evaluation of resistance to rice blast. Breed Sci 60:604–612 
Hittalmani S, Parco A, Mew TV, Zeigler RS, Huang N (2000) Fine mapping and DNA marker-  
    assisted pyramiding of the three major genes for blast resistance in rice. Theor Appl Genet  
    100:1121–1128 
Huang Y (2001) Rice ideotype breeding of Guangdong Academy of Agricultural Sciences in retro- 
    spect. Guangdong Agric Sci 3:2–6. (in Chinese) 
Hussain AJ, Ali J, Siddiq EA, Gupta VS, Reddy UK, Ranjekar PK (2011) Mapping of tms8 gene  
    for temperature-sensitive genic male sterility (TGMS) in rice (Oryza sativa L.). Plant Breed  
    131(1):42–47 
Imai I, Kimball JA, Conway B et al (2013) Validation of yield-enhancing quantitative trait loci  
    from a low-yielding wild ancestor of rice. Mol Breed 32:101–120 
Itoh  H,  Tatsumi  T,  Sakamoto  T,  Otomo  K,  Toyomasu  T,  Kitano  H,  Ashikari  M,  Ichihara  S,  
    Matsuoka  M  (2004)  A  rice  semidwarf  gene,  Tan-Ginbozu  (D35),  encodes  the  gibberel- 
    lin  biosynthesis  enzyme,  ent-kaurene  oxidase.  Plant  Mol  Biol  54(4):533–547.  https://doi. 
    org/10.1023/B:PLAN.0000038261.21060.47 
Jairin J, Sansen K, Wongboon W, Kothcharerk J (2010) Detection of a brown planthopper resis- 
    tance gene bph4 at the same chromosomal position of Bph3 using two different genetic back- 
    grounds of rice. Breed Sci 60:71–75. https://doi.org/10.1270/jsbbs.60.71 
Jing S, Zhao Y, Du B, Chen R, Zhu L, He G (2017) Genomics of interaction between the brown  
    planthopper and rice. Curr Opin Insect Sci 19:82–87 
Johnson  AAT,  Kyriacou  B,  Callahan  DL,  Carruthers  L,  Stangoulis  J,  Lombi  E  et  al  (2011)  
    Constitutive  overexpression  of  the  OsNAS  gene  family  reveals  single-gene  strategies  for  
     effective iron- and zinc-biofortification of rice endosperm. PLoS One 6(9):e24476. https://doi. 
    org/10.1371/journal.pone.0024476 
Joseph M, Gopalakrishnan S, Sharma RK, Singh VP, Singh AK, Singh NK, Mohapatra T (2004)  
    Combining bacterial blight resistance and basmati quality characteristics by phenotypic and  
    molecular marker-assisted selection in rice. Mol Breed 13(4):377–387 
Kaladhar K, Swamy BPM, Babu AP, Reddy CS, Sarla N (2008) Mapping quantitative trait loci  
    for yield traits in BC2F  population derived from Swarna x O. nivara cross. Rice Genet Newsl 2 
    24:34–36. https://doi.org/10.1093/jhered/esr145 
Karki S, Rizal G, Quick WP (2013) Improvement of photosynthesis in rice (Oryza sativa L.) by  
    inserting the C4 pathway. Rice 6:28. https://doi.org/10.1186/1939- 8433- 6- 28 
Karmakar S, Molla KA, Das K, Sarkar SN, Datta SK, Datta K (2017) Dual gene expression cas- 
    sette is superior than single gene cassette for enhancing sheath blight tolerance in transgenic  
    rice. Sci Rep 7:7900. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598- 017- 08180- x 

----------------------- Page 39-----------------------

Advances in Genetics and Breeding of Rice: An Overview                                                25 

Kumar A, Dixit S, Ram T, Yadaw RB, Mishra KK, Mandal NP (2014) Breeding high-yielding  
    drought-tolerant rice: genetic variations and conventional and molecular approaches. J Exp Bot  
    65(21):6265–6278. https://doi.org/10.1093/jxb/eru363 
Lafitte HR, Guan YS, Shi Y, Li ZK (2007) Whole plant responses, key processes, and adaptation to  
    drought stress: the case of rice. J Exp Bot 58:169–175 
Le DT, Chu HD, Sasaya T (2015) Creation of transgenic rice plants producing small interfering  
    RNA of Rice tungro spherical virus. GM Crops Food 6(1):47–53 
Lee J-H, Muhsin M, Atienza GA, Kwak D-Y, Kim S-M, De Leon TB, Angeles ER, Coloquio E,  
    Kondoh H, Satoh K et al (2010) Single nucleotide polymorphisms in a gene for translation ini- 
    tiation factor (eIF4G) of rice (Oryza sativa) associated with resistance to Rice tungro spherical  
    virus. Mol Plant-Microbe Interact 23:29–38 
Li T, Liu B (2016) TALEN-mediated homologous recombination produces site-directed DNA base  
    change and herbicide-resistant rice. J Genet Genomics 43:297–305 
Li JM, Yuan LP (2000) Hybrid rice: genetics, breeding, and seed production. Plant Breed Rev  
    17:15–158 
Li M, Li X, Zhou Z et al (2016) Reassessment of the four yield-related genes Gn1a, DEP1, GS3,  
    and IPA1 in rice using a CRISPR/Cas9 system. Front Plant Sci 7:377. https://doi.org/10.3389/ 
    fpls.2016.00377 
Liang F, Deng Q, Wang Y et al (2004) Molecular marker-assisted selection for yield-enhancing  
    genes in the progeny of “9311×O. rufipogon” using SSR. Euphytica 139:159–165 
Lin TP, Caspar T, Somerville CR, Preiss J (1988) Isolation and characterization of a starchless  
    mutant of Arabidopsis thaliana (L.) Heynh lacking ADP glucose pyrophosphorylase activity.  
    Plant Physiol 86:1131–1135 
Liu SP, Li X, Wang CY, Li XH, He YQ (2003) Improvement of resistance to rice blast in Zhenshan  
    97 by molecular marker-aided selection. Acta Bot Sin 45:1346–1350 
Liu X, Zhang C, Li X, Tu J (2016) Pyramiding and evaluation of both a foreign Bacillus thuringi- 
    ensis and a Lysine-rich protein gene in the elite indica rice 9311. Breed Sci 66(4):591–598 
Luo Y, Ma T, Zhang A, Ong KH, Li Z, Yang J, Yin Z (2016) Marker-assisted breeding of the  
    rice restorer line Wanhui 6725 for disease resistance, submergence tolerance and aromatic fra- 
    grance. Rice (N Y) 9:66. https://doi.org/10.1186/s12284- 016- 0139- 9 
Luu T, Huyen N, Cuc LM, Ismail AM, Ham LH (2012) Introgression of the salinity tolerance QTL  
    Saltol into AS996, the elite rice variety of Vietnam. Am J Plant Sci 3:981–987 
Ma  L,  Zhu  F,  Li  Z  et  al  (2015)  TALEN-based  mutagenesis  of  lipoxygenase  LOX3  enhances  
    the  storage  tolerance  of  rice  (Oryza  sativa)  seeds.  PLoS  One  10(12):e0143877.  https://doi. 
    org/10.1371/journal.pone.0143877 
Mackill DJ, Coffman WR, Garrity DP (1996) Rainfed lowland rice improvement. International  
    Rice Research Institute, Los Baños 
Mahender A, Anandan A, Pradhan SK et al (2016) Rice grain nutritional traits and their enhance- 
    ment  using  relevant  genes  and  QTLs  through  advanced  approaches.  Springerplus  5:2086.  
    https://doi.org/10.1186/s40064- 016- 3744- 6 
Manikandan  R,  Balakrishnan  N,  Sudhakar  D,  Udayasuriyan  V  (2016)  Transgenic  rice  plants  
    expressing synthetic cry2AX1 gene exhibit resistance to rice leaffolder (Cnaphalocrosis medi- 
    nalis). 3 Biotech 6(1):10 
Marri PR, Sarla N, Vemireddy LR, Siddiq EA (2005) Identification of yield enhancing quantitative  
    trait loci (QTLs) from Oryza rufipogon of Indian origin. BMC Genet 6:33 
Mi J, Li G, Huang J, Yu H, Zhou F, Zhang Q, Ouyang Y, Mou T (2016) Stacking S5-n and f5-n to  
    overcome sterility in indica-japonica hybrid rice. Theor Appl Genet 129(3):563–575. https:// 
    doi.org/10.1007/s00122- 015- 2648- 0. Epub 2015 Dec 24 
Murai M, Takamure I, Sato S, Tokutome T, Sato Y (2002) Effects of the dwarfing gene originating  
    from ‘Dee-geo-woo-gen’ on yield and its related traits in rice. Breed Sci 52:95–100 
Nagadhara D, Ramesh S, Pasalu IC et al (2004) Transgenic rice plants expressing the snowdrop  
    lectin gene (gna) exhibit high-level resistance to the whitebacked planthopper (Sogatella fur- 
    cifera). Theor Appl Genet 109(7):1399–1405. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00122- 004- 1750- 5 

----------------------- Page 40-----------------------

26                                                                   E. A. Siddiq and L. R. Vemireddy 

Nair S, Bentur JS, Sama VSAK (2011) Mapping gall midge resistance genes: towards durable  
    resistance through gene pyramiding. In: Muralidharan K, Siddiq EA (eds) Genomics and crop  
    improvement:  relevance  and  reservations.  Institute  of  Biotechnology,  ANGR  Agricultural  
    University, Hyderabad, pp 256–264 
Narayanan  NN,  Baisakh  N,  Vera  Cruz  N,  Gnananmanickam  SS,  Datta  K,  Datta  SK  (2002)  
    Molecular breeding for the development of blast and bacterial blight resistance in rice cv. IR50.  
    Crop Sci 42:2072–2079. https://doi.org/10.2135/cropsci2002.2072 
Nayak P, Basu D, Das S et al (1997) Transgenic elite indica rice plants expressing  CryIAc delta-  
    endotoxin of Bacillus thuringiensis are resistant against yellow stem borer (Scirpophaga incer- 
    tulas). Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 94(6):2111–2116. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.94.6.2111 
Norton GJ, Douglas A, Lahner B, Yakubova E, Guerinot ML, Pinson SRM et al (2014) Genome  
    wide association mapping of grain arsenic, copper, molybdenum and zinc in rice (Oryza sativa  
    L.) grown at four international field sites. PLoS One 9:e89685. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal. 
    pone.0089685 
Obara M, Tamura W, Ebitani T, Yano M, Sato T, Yamaya T (2010) Fine-mapping of  qRL6.1, a  
    major QTL for root length of rice seedlings grown under a wide range of NH4+ concentrations  
    in hydroponic conditions. Theor Appl Genet 121:535–547 
Ohsumi  A,  Takai  T,  Ida  M, Yamamoto  T,  Arai-Sanoh Y, Yano  M,  Ando  T,  Kondo  M  (2011)  
    Evaluation of yield performance in rice near-isogenic lines with increased spikelet number.  
    Field Crops Res 120:68–75. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fcr.2010.08.013 
Ouyang Y, Chen J, Ding J, Zhang Q (2009) Advances in the understanding of inter-subspecific  
    hybrid sterility and wide-compatibility in rice. Chin Sci Bull 54:2332–2341 
Paine  JA,  Shipton  CA,  Chaggar  S  et  al  (2005)  Improving  the  nutritional  value  of  golden  rice  
    through increased provitamin A content. Nat Biotechnol 23:482–487 
Park S-I, Kim Y-S, Kim J-J, Mok J-E, Kim Y-H, Park H-M, Kim I-S, Yoon H-S (2017) Improved  
    stress tolerance and productivity in transgenic rice plants constitutively expressing the Oryza  
    sativa glutathione synthetase OsGS under paddy field conditions. J Plant Physiol 215:39–47 
Pérez L, Soto E, Farré G, Juanos J, Villorbina G, Bassie L, Medina V, Serrato AJ, Sahrawy M,  
    Rojas JA, Romagosa I, Muñoz P, Zhu C, Christou P (2019) CRISPR/Cas9 mutations in the  
    rice  Waxy/GBSSI  gene  induce  allele-specific  and  zygosity-dependent  feedback  effects  on  
    endosperm   starch   biosynthesis.   Plant   Cell   Rep   38(3):417–433.   https://doi.org/10.1007/ 
    s00299-019-02388-z. Epub 2019 Feb 4. PMID: 30715580. 
Pinson SRM, Capdevielle FM, Oard JH (2005) Confirming QTLs and finding additional loci con- 
    ditioning sheath blight resistance in rice using recombinant inbred lines. Crop Sci 45:503–510.  
    https://doi.org/10.2135/cropsci2005.0503 
Pradhan S, Chakraborty A, Sikdar N, Chakraborty S, Bhattacharyya J, Mitra J, Manna A, Dutta  
    Gupta S, Sen SK (2016) Marker-free transgenic rice expressing the vegetative insecticidal pro- 
    tein (Vip) of Bacillus thuringiensis shows broad insecticidal properties. Planta 244(4):789–804.  
    https://doi.org/10.1007/s00425- 016- 2535- 1. Epub 2016 May 10 
Priyadarshi  R,  Arremsetty  HPS,  Singh  AK,  Khandekar  D,  Ulaganathan  K,  Shenoy  V  (2017)  
    Molecular stacking of wide compatibility gene, S5n and elongated uppermost internode (eui)  

    gene into IR58025B, an elite maintainer line of rice. J Plant Biochem Biotechnol 26(4):425–435 
Ram T, Majumder ND (2007) Introgression of broad-spectrum blast resistance gene(s) into cul- 
    tivated rice (Oryza sativa ssp. indica) from wild rice O. rufipogon. Curr Sci 92(2):225–230 
Rao KV, Rathore KS, Hodges TK, Fu X, Stoger E, Sudhakar D, Williams S, Christou P, Bharathi  
    M, Brown DP, Powell KS, Spence J, Gatehouse AM, Gatehouse JA (1998) Expression of snow- 
    drop lectin (GNA) in transgenic rice plants confers resistance to rice brown planthopper. Plant  
    J 15(4):469–477 
Rao  SD,  Neeraja  CN,  Madhu  Babu  P,  Nirmala  B,  Suman  K,  Rao  LVS,  Surekha  K,  Raghu  P,  
    Longvah T, Surendra P, Kumar R, Babu VR, Voleti SR (2020) Zinc biofortified rice variet- 
    ies: challenges, possibilities, and progress in India. Front Nutr 7:26. https://doi.org/10.3389/ 
    fnut.2020.00026 

----------------------- Page 41-----------------------

Advances in Genetics and Breeding of Rice: An Overview                                               27 

Rashid M, Guangyuan H, Guangxiao Y, Hussain J, Xu Y (2012) AP2/ERF transcription factor in  
    rice: genome-wide canvas and syntenic relationships between monocots and eudicots. Evol  
    Bioinformatics Online 8:321–355. https://doi.org/10.4137/EBO.S9369 
Reddy O, Siddiq E, Sarma N et al (2000) Genetic analysis of temperature-sensitive male sterility  
    in rice. Theor Appl Genet 100:794–801. https://doi.org/10.1007/s001220051354 
Saha P, Majumder P (2006) Transgenic rice expressing Allium sativum leaf lectin with enhanced  
    resistance against sap-sucking insect pests. Planta 223:1329–1343 
Sahoo RK, Gill SS, Tuteja N (2012) Pea DNA helicase 45 promotes salinity stress tolerance in  
    IR64 rice with improved yield. Plant Signal Behav 7(8):1042–1046 
Saijo Y,  Hata  S,  Kyozuka  J,  Shimamoto  K,  Izui  K  (2000)  Overexpression  of  a  single  Ca2+- 

    dependent protein kinase confers both cold and salt/drought tolerance on rice plants. Plant  
    J 23:319–327 
Sasaki A, Ashikari M, Ueguchi-Tanaka M, Itoh H, Nishimura A, Datta S, Ishiyama K, Saito T,  
    Kobayashi M, Khush GS, Kitano H, Matsuoka M (2002) Green revolution: a mutant gibberellin-  
    synthesis gene in rice. Nature 416(6882):701–702. https://doi.org/10.1038/416701a 
Sato Y, Sentoku N, Miura Y, Hirochika H, Kitanoc H, Matsuoka M (1999) Loss-of-function muta- 
    tions in the rice homeobox gene OSH15 affect the architecture of internodes resulting in dwarf  
    plants. EMBO J 18(4):992–1002. https://doi.org/10.1093/emboj/18.4.992 
Sattari M, Kathiresan A, Gregorio G, Hernandez JE, Nas TM, Virmani SS (2007) Development and  
    use of a two-gene marker-aided selection system for fertility restorer genes in rice. Euphytica  
    153:35–42 
Septiningsih EM, Pamplona AM, Sanchez DL, Neeraja CN, Vergara GV, Heuer S, Ismail AM,  
    Mackill DJ (2009) Development of submergence-tolerant rice cultivars: the Sub1 locus and  
    beyond. Ann Bot 103(2):151–160. https://doi.org/10.1093/aob/mcn206 
Shim J, Torollo G, Angeles-Shim RB, Cabunagan RC, Choi I-R, Yeo U-S, Ha W-G (2015) Rice  
    tungro spherical virus resistance into photoperiod-insensitive japonica rice by marker-assisted  
    selection. Breed Sci 65:345–351. https://doi.org/10.1270/jsbbs.65.345 
Siddiq EA, Ali J (1999) Innovative male sterility systems for exploitation of hybrid vigour in crop  
    plants: 1. Environment sensitive genetic male sterility system. PINSA B65(6):331–350 
Siddiq  EA,  Singh  S  (2005)  Wide-compatibility  system  for  yield  enhancement  of  tropical  rice  
    through intersubspecific hybridization. Adv Agron 87:157–209 
Singh SP, Sundaram RM, Biradar SK, Ahmed MI, Viraktamath BC, Siddiq EA (2006) Identification  
    of simple sequence repeat markers for utilizing wide-compatibility genes in inter-subspecific  
    hybrids  in  rice  (Oryza  sativa  L.).  Theor Appl  Genet  113:509–517.  https://doi.org/10.1007/ 
    s00122- 006- 0316- 0 
Singh VK, Singh A, Singh SP, Ellur RK, Choudhary V, Sarkel S, Singh D, Krishnan SG, Nagarajan  
    M, Vinod KK, Singh UD, Rathore R, Prashanthi SK, Agrawal PK, Bhatt JC, Mohapatra T,  
    Prabhu KV, Singh AK (2012) Incorporation of blast resistance into ‘PRR78’, an elite Basmati  
    rice restorer line, through marker assisted backcross breeding. Field Crops Res 128:8–16 
Singla-Pareek SL, Yadav SK, Pareek A, Reddy MK, Sopory SK (2006) Transgenic tobacco over- 
    expressing glyoxalase pathway enzymes grow and set viable seeds in zinc-spiked soils. Plant  
    Physiol 140(2):613–623. https://doi.org/10.1104/pp.105.073734 
Song X, Qiu S, Xu C, Li X, Zhang Q (2005) Genetic dissection of embryo sac fertility, pollen  
    fertility, and their contributions to spikelet fertility of intersubspecific hybrids in rice. Theor  
    Appl Genet 110:205–211 
Sudhakar T, Panigrahy M, Lakshmanaik M, Babu AP, Reddy CS, Anuradha K, Swamy BPM, Sarla  
    N (2012) Variation and correlation of phenotypic traits contributing to high yield in KMR3:  
    Oryza rufipogon introgression lines. Int J Plant Breed Genet 6:69–82 
Sun YW, Jiao GA, Liu ZP, Zhang X, Li JY, Guo XP, Du WM, Du JL, Francis F, Zhao YD, Xia LQ  
    (2017) Generation of high-amylose rice through CRISPR/Cas9-mediated targeted mutagenesis  
    of starch branching enzymes. Front Plant Sci 8:298. https://doi.org/10.3389/fpls.2017.00298 

----------------------- Page 42-----------------------

28                                                                   E. A. Siddiq and L. R. Vemireddy 

Sundaram RM, Vishnupriya MR, Biradar SK, Laha GS, Reddy AG, Rani NS, Sarma NP, Sonti RV  
    (2008) Marker assisted introgression of bacterial blight resistance in Samba Mahsuri, an elite  
    indica rice variety. Euphytica 160(3):411–422 
Swamy  BPM,  Kumar  A  (2013)  Genomics-based  precision  breeding  approaches  to  improve  
    drought   tolerance   in   rice.   Biotechnol   Adv   31(8):1308–1318.   https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
    biotechadv.2013.05.004 
Swamy BPM, Sarla N (2008) Yield-enhancing quantitative trait loci (QTLs) from wild species.  
    Biotechnol Adv 26(1):106–120 
Swamy BPM, Kaladhar K, Ramesha MS, Viraktamath BC, Sarla N (2011) Molecular mapping of  
    QTLs for yield and yield-related traits in Oryza sativa cv. Swarna ×  O. nivara (IRGC81848)  
    backcross population. Rice Sci 18(3):178–186 
Swamy  BPM,  Kaladhar  K,  Shobharani  N,  Prasad  GSV, Viraktamath  BC,  Reddy  GA,  Sarla  N  
    (2012)  QTL  analysis  for  grain  quality  traits  in  2  BC2F   populations  derived  from  crosses 2 
    between Oryza sativa cv. Swarna and 2 accessions of O. nivara. J Hered 103(3):442–452 
Swamy BPM, Kaladhar K, Reddy GA, Viraktamath BC, Sarla N (2014) Mapping and introgres- 
    sion of QTL for yield and related traits in two backcross populations derived from Oryza sativa  
    cv. Swarna and two accessions of O. nivara. J Genet 93(3):643–654 
Swamy BPM, Descalsota GIL, Nha CT, Amparado A, Inabangan-Asilo MA, Manito C, Tesoro F,  
    Reinke R (2018) Identification of genomic regions associated with agronomic and biofortifica- 
    tion traits in DH populations of rice. PLoS One 13(8):e0201756 
Ueguchi-Tanaka  M,  Fujisawa Y,  Kobayashi  M, Ashikari  M,  Iwaski Y,  Kitano  H,  Matsuoka  M  
    (2000) Rice dwarf mutant d1, which is defective in the alpha subunit of the heterotrimeric G  
    protein, affects gibberellin signal transduction. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 97(21):11638–11643.  
    https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.97.21.11638 
Uga Y,  Sugimoto  K,  Ogawa  S  et  al  (2013)  Control  of  root  system  architecture  by  DEEPER  
    ROOTING 1 increases rice yield under drought conditions. Nat Genet 45:1097–1102 
Valarmathi P, Kumar G, Robin S, Manonmani S, Dasgupta I, Rabindran R (2016) Evaluation of  
    virus resistance and agronomic performance of rice cultivar ASD 16 after transfer of trans- 
    gene against Rice tungro bacilliform virus by backcross breeding. Virus Genes 52(4):521–529.  
    https://doi.org/10.1007/s11262- 016- 1318- x. Epub 2016 Mar 16 
Wang F, Wang C (2016) Enhanced rice blast resistance by CRISPR/Cas9-targeted mutagenesis of  
    the ERF transcription factor gene OsERF922. PLoS One 11(4):1–18 
Wang Y, Pinson SRM, Fjellstrom RG, Tabien RE (2012a) Phenotypic gain from introgression of  
    two QTL, qSB9-2 and qSB12-1 for rice sheath blight resistance. Mol Breed 30:293–303 
Wang P, Xing Y, Li Z et al (2012b) Improving rice yield and quality by QTL pyramiding. Mol  
    Breed 29:903–913. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11032- 011- 9679- 2 
Wang L, Lu Q, Wen X, Lu C (2015) Enhanced sucrose loading improves rice yield by increasing  
    grain size. Plant Physiol 169:2848–2862 
Wang S, Tholen D, Zhu X-G (2017a) C4 photosynthesis in C3 rice: a theoretical analysis of bio- 
    chemical and anatomical factors. Plant Cell Environ 40:80–94 
Wang Y, Jiang W, Liu H, Zeng Y, Du B, Zhu L, He G, Chen R (2017b) Marker assisted pyramiding  
    of Bph6 and Bph9 into elite restorer line 93-11 and development of functional marker for Bph9.  
    Rice (N Y) 10(1):51. https://doi.org/10.1186/s12284- 017- 0194- x 
Wei F-J, Droc G, Guiderdoni E, Hsing YC (2013) International consortium of rice mutagenesis:  
    resources and beyond. Rice (N Y) 6(1):39 
Xiao J, Grandillo S, Ahn SN, McCouch SR, Tanksley SD, Li J, Yuan L (1996) Genes from wild  
    rice improve yield. Nature 384:223–224 
Xu K, Xia X, Fukao T, Canlas P, Maghirang-Rodriguez R, Heuer S et al (2006) Sub1A is an ethyl- 
    ene response factor-like gene that confers submergence tolerance to rice. Nature 442:705–708 
Xu R, Li H, Qin R, Wang L, Li L, Wei P et al (2014) Gene targeting using the Agrobacterium  
    tumefaciens   mediated   CRISPR-Cas   system   in   rice.   Rice   7:5.   https://doi.org/10.1186/ 
    s12284- 014- 0005- 6 

----------------------- Page 43-----------------------

Advances in Genetics and Breeding of Rice: An Overview                                                   29 

Xu R, Qin R, Li H, Li D, Li L, Wei P et al (2017) Generation of targeted mutant rice using a  
    CRISPR-Cpf1 system. Plant Biotechnol J 15:713–717. https://doi.org/10.1111/pbi.12669 
Yadav S, Anuradha G, Kumar RR, Vemireddy LR, Sudhakar R, Donempudi K, Venkata D, Jabeen  
    F, Narasimhan YK, Marathi B, Siddiq EA (2015) Identification of QTLs and possible candidate  
    genes conferring sheath blight resistance in rice (Oryza sativa L.). Springerplus 4:175 
Yamamuro C, Ihara Y, Wu X, Noguchi T, Fujioka S, Takatsuto S, Ashikari M, Kitano H, Matsuoka  
    M (2000) Loss of function of a rice brassinosteroid insensitive1 homolog prevents internode  
    elongation and bending of the lamina joint. Plant Cell 12(9):1591–1606 
Yanagihara  S  et  al  (1995)  Molecular  analysis  of  the  inheritance  of  the  S-5  locus,  conferring  
    wide  compatibility  in  indica/japonica  hybrids  of  rice  (Oryza  sativa  L.). Theor Appl  Genet  
    90:182–188 
Ye X, Al-Babili S, Klöti A, Zhang J, Lucca P, Beyer P, Potrykus I (2000) Engineering the pro- 
    vitamin A (β-carotene) biosynthetic pathway into (carotenoid free) rice endosperm. Science  
    287:303–305 
Yi M, Nwe KT, Vanavichit A, Chaiarree W, Toojinda T (2009) Marker assisted backcross breed- 
    ing to improve cooking quality traits in Myanmar rice cultivar Manawthukha. Field Crops Res  
    113:178–186 
Yin  X,  Biswal AK,  Dionora  J,  Perdigon  KM,  Balahadia  CP,  Mazumdar  S,  Chater  C,  Lin  HC,  
    Coe RA, Kretzschmar T, Gray JE, Quick PW, Bandyopadhyay A. (2017) CRISPR-Cas9 and  
    CRISPR-Cpf1 mediated targeting of a stomatal developmental gene EPFL9 in rice. Plant Cell  
    Rep. 36(5):745–757. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00299-017-2118-z.  
Yuan LP, Fu XQ (1995) Technology of hybrid rice production. FAO, Rome 
Zhang J, Li X, Jiang G, Xu Y, He Y (2006) Pyramiding of Xa7 and Xa21 for the improvement  
    of disease resistance to bacterial blight in hybrid rice. Plant Breed 125:600–605. https://doi. 
    org/10.1111/j.1439- 0523.2006.01281.x 
Zhang F, Jiang Y-Z, Yu S-B, Ali J, Paterson AH, Khush GS, Xu J-L, Gao Y-M, Fu B-Y, Lafitte R,  
    Li Z-K (2013) Three genetic systems controlling growth, development and productivity of rice  
    (Oryza sativa L.): a reevaluation of the ‘Green Revolution’. Theor Appl Genet 126:1011–1024 
Zhou H, He M, Li J, Chen L, Huang Z, Zheng S, Zhu L, Ni E, Jiang D, Zhao B, Zhuang C (2016)  
    Development of commercial thermo-sensitive genic male sterile rice accelerates hybrid rice  
    breeding using the CRISPR/Cas9-mediated  TMS5 editing system. Sci Rep 6:37395.  https:// 
    doi.org/10.1038/srep37395 
Zuo SM, Yin YJ, Zhang L, Zhang YF, Chen ZX, Pan XB (2007) Breeding value and further mapping  
    of a QTL qSB-11 conferring the rice sheath blight resistance. Chin J Rice Sci 21(2):136–142 
Zuo M, Zhu YJ, Yin YJ, Wang H, Zhang YF, Chen ZX, Gu SL, Pan XB (2014) Comparison and  
    confirmation of quantitative trait loci conferring partial resistance to rice sheath blight on chro- 
    mosome 9. Plant Dis 98(7):957–964 

Open Access    This chapter is licensed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution 4.0  
International License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/), which permits use, sharing,  
adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give appropriate  
credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons license and  
indicate if changes were made. 
    The images or other third party material in this chapter are included in the chapter's Creative  
Commons license, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not  
included in the chapter's Creative Commons license and your intended use is not permitted by  
statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from  
the copyright holder. 

----------------------- Page 44-----------------------

Strategies for Engineering Photosynthesis  
for Enhanced Plant Biomass Production 

Wataru Yamori 

Abstract   Crop productivity would have to increase by 60–110% compared with  
the 2005 level by 2050 to meet both the food and energy demands of the growing  
population. Although more than 90% of crop biomass is derived from photosyn- 
thetic  products,  photosynthetic  improvements  have  not  yet  been  addressed  by  
breeding. Thus, it has been considered that enhancing photosynthetic capacity is  
considered a promising approach for increasing crop yield. Now, we need to iden- 
tify  the  specific  targets  that  would  improve  leaf  photosynthesis  to  realize  a  new  
Green  Revolution.  This  chapter  summarizes  the  various  genetic  engineering  
approaches that can be used to enhance photosynthetic capacity and crop productiv- 
ity. The  targets  considered  for  the  possible  candidates  include  Rubisco,  Rubisco  
activase, enzymes of the Calvin–Benson cycle, and CO  transport, as well as photo-2 
synthetic  electron  transport.  Finally,  it  describes  the  importance  of  considering  
ways  to  improve  photosynthesis  not  under  the  stable  environmental  conditions  
already examined in many studies with the aim of improving photosynthetic capac- 
ity, but under natural conditions in which various environmental factors, and espe- 
cially irradiation, continually fluctuate. 

Keywords  Calvin–Benson cycle · CO  assimilation · CO  transport · Electron 2 2 
transport · Photosynthesis · Rubisco 

1     Introduction 

Crop productivity would have to increase by 60–110% compared with the 2005  
level by 2050 to meet both the food and energy demands of the growing population  
(Tilman et al. 2011; Alexandratos and Bruinsma 2012). At the same time, the CO  2 
concentration in the atmosphere is increasing and is predicted to reach 550  μmol/ 
mol by 2050 (IPCC 2013; Ballantyne et al. 2012), which will lead to an increase in  
air temperature. Thus, it is considered that approaches designed to improve plant  

W. Yamori (*)  
Institute for Sustainable Agro-Ecosystem Services, Graduate School of Agricultural and Life  
Sciences, The University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan 
e-mail: yamori@g.ecc.u-tokyo.ac.jp 

© The Author(s) 2021                                                                           31 
J. Ali, S. H. Wani (eds.), Rice Improvement,  
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-66530-2_2 

----------------------- Page 45-----------------------

32                                                                      W. Yamori 

biomass and crop yield should take account of global climate change and the pre- 
dicted future environmental conditions. 
   It has been reported that in most cases leaf photosynthetic rate does not correlate  
positively  with  grain  yield  (Richards  2000).  Some  critical  reviews  suggest  that  
improving photosynthesis would not be a useful strategy for enhancing crop pro- 
ductivity (Gu et al. 2014; Sinclair et al. 2004). However, a meta-analysis of several  
studies on elevated CO  experiments in various crops has indicated that any strategy 2 
for  increasing  photosynthesis  can  enhance  crop  yield  (Ainsworth  et  al.  2008).  
Similarly, it has been proposed that altering photosynthetic electron transport rates  
by manipulating the cytochrome b /f complex can improve both the photosynthetic 6 
capacity and crop yield of transgenic plants (Yamori et al. 2016a; Fig. 1). Enhancing  
photosynthetic  capacity  in  plants  is  now  considered  a  promising  approach  for  
increasing crop yield and decreasing the atmospheric concentration of CO , which 2 
is the primary component of greenhouse gases. 
   This chapter summarizes the various genetic engineering approaches that can be  
used to enhance photosynthetic capacity and plant production. The targets consid- 
ered for the possible candidates include Rubisco, Rubisco activase, enzymes of the  
Calvin–Benson  cycle,  and  CO   transport,  as  well  as  photosynthetic  electron 2 

Fig. 1   Relationship                    t 
between CO  assimilation                h                R2 = 0.67 
          2                              g 
rate at a CO  concentration              i      45 
          2                              e 
of 390 μmol/mol, total                   w 
plant dry weight at the                  y ) 
                                            t 
final stage, and grain yield             r   n  30 
                                        d    a 
in rice. Wild type: open                    l 
                                         t   p 
triangles; transgenic plants             n / 
that contain variable                    a   g 
                                        l  (  15 
amounts of Rieske FeS                    p 
                                        l 
protein in the cytochrome                a 
                                         t 
b6/f complex from 10 to                  o        0 
100% of wild-type levels:               T 
filled circles. The                             24    0     10     20      30 
regression lines are shown 
                                                         R2 = 0.68 
                                        d 
                                        l ) 
                                         e  t   16 
                                         i   n 
                                         y a 
                                             l 
                                         n   p 
                                         i / 
                                         a 
                                         r   g 
                                        G (       8 

                                                  0 
                                                      0     10     20      30 
                                                    CO2 assimilation rate 
                                                                      2 
                                                          (μmol/m /s) 

----------------------- Page 46-----------------------

Strategies for Engineering Photosynthesis for Enhanced Plant Biomass Production                          33 

transport. Finally, it describes the importance of considering ways to improve pho- 
tosynthesis  not  under  the  stable  environmental  conditions  already  examined  in  
many studies with the aim of improving photosynthetic capacity, but under natural  
conditions in which various environmental factors, and especially irradiation, con- 
tinually fluctuate. 

2      Improving Rubisco Performance 

2.1      Rubisco Kinetics  

Rubisco (ribulose-1,5-bisphosphate carboxylase/oxygenase) is an enzyme involved  
in the first step of CO  fixation in photosynthesis (Fig. 2). Rubisco has a low cata-2 
lytic efficiency and can only fix approximately two to four CO  molecules per sec-2 
ond per active site in higher C  plants. Thus, 20–30% of the nitrogen in the leaves of 3 
C  plants is invested in Rubisco to compensate for its low activity (Spreitzer and 3 
Salvucci 2002). There is a strong positive correlation between leaf Rubisco content  
and photosynthetic rate (Evans 1989; Makino et al. 1997; Wright et al. 2004), indi- 
cating that Rubisco would be rate-limiting as regards photosynthesis at the current  
CO  concentration. Rubisco can fix CO  in photosynthesis and O  in photorespira-2 2  2 
tion (Fig. 2). Photosynthetic CO  fixation produces two molecules of phosphoglyc-2 
erate (PGA) for every carbon fixed, while photorespiration produces one PGA and  
one phosphoglycolate (PGO). PGO must be recycled to PGA, with a loss of CO  2 
and NH  via a photorespiratory pathway. Although the released CO  may be re-fixed 3   2 
by the chloroplasts and the NH  re-assimilated in the leaves (Morris et al.  1988; 3 
Busch et al. 2013), photorespiration is considered to be a wasteful reaction. Thus, it  
may  be  possible  to  improve  photosynthetic  efficiency  by  modifying  Rubisco  in  
plants to increase catalytic activity and/or decrease oxygenation rate. 
    In plants, Rubisco usually consists of two types of protein subunit: a chloroplast-  
encoded large subunit, which contains the active site, and nuclear-encoded small  
subunits. The introduction of Rubisco variants with high specificity values such as  
that from C  plants and cyanobacteria into plants could improve the photosynthetic 4 
efficiency of crop plants. Previously, transgenic tobacco plants expressing Flaveria  
bidentis (C ) and F. pringlei (C ) Rubisco large subunit chimeras revealed that the 4 3 
substitution of methionine-309 with isoleucine is responsible for increases in the  
carboxylation rate of Rubisco (Whitney et al. 2011). However, the CO  assimilation 2 
rate and plant growth were lower in transgenic plants than in wild-type plants since  
transformants decreased the Rubisco content of the former compared with the latter.  
Lin et al. (2014) successfully produced transgenic tobacco plants with functional  
Rubisco by replacing the Rubisco with the large and small subunit genes found in  
cyanobacterium.  The  transgenic  plants  increased  the  CO   assimilation  rate  per 2 
Rubisco content, but they grew more slowly than wild-type plants. Thus, although  
mutated  forms  of  Rubisco  protein  have  been  achieved  in  tobacco  plants,  the  

----------------------- Page 47-----------------------

                                                                                                                                                    3 
                                                                                                                                                    4 

                                   Stomata    CO2 

                                                                                                                Leaf 
                                                    HCO3-                       HCO3-                  Cell 
                                   Sugars                           C4  acid           CO pump 
                                                                                           2 

                                                              C4  cycle 
                                                      C3 acid 
                                                                                HCO3- 

                                     Starch 
                                                            CO2 
                                                                          O2 
                                                     RuBP 
                                          SBPase                                 Rubisco 
                                                                                 activase 
                                               Calvin-Benson                                               CO2 
                                                    cycle                      PGO 
                                                   PGA             Rubisco                Photorespiratory 
                                                                                CO2       bypass 

                                      NAPDH, ATP 

                                    Electron transport                       Chloroplast 

Fig. 2   Strategies for engineering photosynthesis for enhanced plant biomass production. The targets considered for the possible candidates include Rubisco  
catalysis, Rubisco activase, photorespiratory bypass, stomatal opening, introduction of C  cycle, introduction of CO  pump from cyanobacteria, Calvin–Benson  
                                                                                                                                                    W 
                                                                                4                       2 
cycle, and electron transport                                                                                                                       .  
                                                                                                                                                    Y 
                                                                                                                                                    a 
                                                                                                                                                    m 
                                                                                                                                                    o 
                                                                                                                                                    r 
                                                                                                                                                    i 

----------------------- Page 48-----------------------

Strategies for Engineering Photosynthesis for Enhanced Plant Biomass Production                               35 

site- directed mutagenesis of Rubisco has as yet been largely unsuccessful (Furbank  
et al. 2015). If the replacement of the Rubisco variants of C -type Rubisco (i.e., a 3 
low catalytic turnover rate for Rubisco, kcat, and a low Michaelis–Menten constant,  
Km; a high Km for CO  indicates low CO  affinity) with C -type or cyanobacteria- 2 2 4 
type Rubisco variants (i.e., high kcat and high Km) is successful, the transgenic C  3 
plants could enhance their photosynthetic efficiency and plant growth toward the  
high-CO  world of the near future.2 
    Although the evidence from transplastomic studies of Rubisco indicates that the  
catalytic variability resides within its large subunit, the importance of its small sub- 
units to Rubisco catalysis has also attracted attention. Recent success has demon- 
strated that the introduction of a C -Rubisco small subunit (rbcS) gene from sorghum 4 
into rice successfully produced chimeric Rubisco with a greater kcat in transgenic  
rice (Ishikawa et al. 2011). This breakthrough could provide future ways to engineer  
Rubisco in various important crops such as wheat and rice. 

2.2      Photorespiration Bypass  

Rubisco is a dual-function enzyme that fixes CO  or O , and these functions are 2 2 
known as photosynthesis and photorespiration, respectively. While photosynthesis  
results  in  a  net  fixation  of  CO ,  the  photorespiratory  pathway  requires ATP  and 2 
releases previously fixed CO  (Fig. 3). The photorespiration rate is affected by the 2 
concentration of CO  in the chloroplast (C ) relative to the O  concentration, and  
                             2                             c                         2 

increases with increasing temperature. At current atmospheric CO  concentrations 2 
and a temperature of 30 °C, the rate of photorespiratory CO  release from the mito-2 
chondria  is  approximately  25%  of  the  CO   assimilation  rate  (Sage  et  al.  2012). 2 
Thus, lowering photorespiratory flux could alleviate the decrease in photosynthetic  
efficiency in C  plants. However, manipulations aimed at blocking the photorespira-3 
tory pathway had detrimental effects on plant growth (Kozaki and Takeba  1996;  
Walker et al. 2016). Nonetheless, advances have been made for engineering plants  
that can make better use of the CO  released from photorespiration via photorespira-2 
tory  bypasses  (Carvalho  et  al.  2012;  Kebeish  et  al.  2007;  Maier  et  al.  2012;  
Peterhansel et al. 2013). 
    To date, three different strategies have been designed to bypass photorespiration  
in  C   plants  (Fig.  3).  The  first  pathway  was  engineered  using  Escherichia  coli 3 
encoded genes from the glycerate pathway that convert glycolate to glycerate and  
release CO  within the chloroplast (Kebeish et al.  2007; Peterhansel et al. 2013). 2 
Transgenic  plants  engineered  with  this  pathway  decreased  photorespiration  and  
enhanced photosynthesis, resulting in improved plant growth (Kebeish et al. 2007).  
With the second approach, transgenic plants engineered with a glycolate catabolic  
cycle designed to oxidize glycolate to CO  in chloroplasts (Fig. 3) displayed higher 2 
photosynthetic rates and greater plant growth (Maier et al. 2012; Peterhansel et al.  
2013). These observations show that shifting glycolate metabolism from the photo- 
respiratory   pathway   via   peroxisome   and   mitochondria   to   the   chloroplast   is  

----------------------- Page 49-----------------------

36                                                                                     W. Yamori 

                                                       Chloroplastic glycerate bypass 
                                                       Chloroplastic glycolate oxidation bypass 
                                                       Peroxisomal glycerate bypass 

                                      Calvin-Benson                ADP    ATP 
            Bypass 2                      cycle        PGA                          glycerate 
         NADH     CO2   10                  CO2                        7    NAD+ 

        NAD+             acetyl-CoA    RuBP                              NADH        6b 
                                                                        Tartronate 
           pyruvate   CoA                  O2                           semialdehyde 
                                                PGO 
                    9                                                 4c 
           CO2        malate 8            2a    1     NAD+  NADH            CO2 
        NADH                 glyoxylate       glycolate       glyoxylate 

                 NAD+        H  O     H  O  O2            2a              Bypass 1 
                              2         2  2 
                                   2b 

         Chloroplast 
                                             glycolate                              glycerate 
                                       2b    O 
                                               2    2a           Bypass 3        NAD+      6a 
                                 H O       H O2 2         CO 
                                   2                         2                  NADH 
                                             glyoxylate      Tartronate        hydroxypyruvate 
                                            Glu       3  4c semialdehyde 4d 
                                          2-OG         NH3                                 5 
                           Peroxisome         glycine                                 serine 

                                                           4a  CO2   4b  NH3 
                                              glycine                                 serine 
                                                             NAD+    NADH 
                               Mitochondrion 

Fig. 3   Schematic diagram of photorespiration in plants (black), with three bypasses to minimize  
photorespiratory expenses engineered in plants (red, blue, green). Enzymatic reactions or metabo- 
lite transport steps are indicated by arrows. (1) phosphogycolate phosphatase, (2a) glycolate oxi- 
dase, (2b) catalase, (3) glyoxylate/glutamate aminotransferase, (4a) glycine decarboxylase, (4b)  
serine hydroxymethyl transferase, (4c) glyoxylate carboligase, which catalyzes the decarboxyl- 
ation of glyoxylate and ligation to a second molecule of glyoxylate to form tartronate semialde- 
hyde,   (4d)   hydroxypyruvate     isomerase,   (5)   serine/glyoxylate   aminotransferase,   (6a)  
hydroxypyruvate reductase in photorespiration, (6b) tartronic semialdehyde reductase, (7) glycer- 
ate kinase, (8) malate synthase, (9) NADP-malic enzyme, (10) pyruvate dehydrogenase. Rubisco  
ribulose-1,5-bisphosphate  carboxylase/oxygenase;  RuBP  ribulose-1,5-bisphosphate;  PGA  phos- 
phoglycerate; PGO phosphoglycolate 

beneficial for plants and can enhance photosynthesis. The third bypass was created  
by short-circuiting the original C  cycle to avoid NH + release and to prevent energy  
                                       2                     3 

loss in its refixation (Carvalho et al. 2012). The glyoxalase in peroxisomes can be  
converted to hydroxypyruvate by introducing glyoxylate carboligase and hydroxypy- 
ruvate isomerase from E. coli into the plant peroxisomes, and feeding them back to  
the C  cycle (Fig.  3) (Carvalho et al.  2012; Peterhansel et al. 2013). However, in 2 
transgenic plants, the photorespiratory cycle has not yet been completely bypassed  

----------------------- Page 50-----------------------

Strategies for Engineering Photosynthesis for Enhanced Plant Biomass Production           37 

and  the  short-circuiting  led  to  damage  of  the  photosynthetic  apparatus  and  thus  
deleterious phenotypes (Carvalho et al. 2012). 
   Facilitating photorespiratory flux through the overexpression of subunits of gly- 
cine decarboxylase (GDC), which produces CO  by the photorespiratory process, 2 
could be another approach for improving photorespiration (Timm et al. 2016). GDC  
comprises four proteins, three enzymes (P-protein, T-protein, and L-protein), and a  
small lipoylated protein known as H-protein, which has no catalytic activity and  
interacts with the other proteins. The overexpression of either GDC-H protein or  
GDC-L protein in Arabidopsis thaliana resulted in increases in CO  assimilation 2 
rate and plant biomass (Timm et al.  2012, 2015, 2016). Additionally, the overex- 
pression of GDC-H contributed to greater plant growth in tobacco (Nicotiana taba- 
cum) in both a controlled environment and under field conditions (Lopez-Calcagno  
et al. 2018). Although the underlying mechanism responsible for these effects has  
not  been  fully  elucidated,  it  has  been  proposed  that  the  Calvin–Benson  cycle  is  
stimulated by the increase in GDC activity, resulting in a decrease in the steady-  
state levels of photorespiratory metabolites. 

3     Improving Thermotolerance of Rubisco Activase 

The Rubisco catalytic sites must be activated to fix CO  (Fig. 2). This requires the 2 
carbamylation of a lysine residue at the Rubisco catalytic site, allowing the binding  
of Mg2+ and ribulose-1,5-bisphosphate (RuBP). Rubisco activase facilitates carba- 

mylation and the maintenance of Rubisco activity by removing inhibitors such as  
tight-binding sugar phosphates from the Rubisco catalytic sites in an ATP-dependent  
manner (Spreitzer and Salvucci 2002; Portis Jr 2003; Parry et al. 2008). 
   In many plant species, the Rubisco activation state decreases at high tempera- 
tures  (Crafts-Brandner  and  Salvucci  2000;  Salvucci  and  Crafts-Brandner  2004a;  
Yamori et al. 2006b, 2014; Yamori and von Caemmerer 2009). Rubisco deactivation  
at high temperature could have occurred because Rubisco activase is insufficiently  
active to keep pace with the faster rates of Rubisco inactivation at high temperature  
due  to  its  thermolability  (Salvucci  and  Crafts-Brandner  2004b).  A  decrease  in  
Rubisco activase content resulted in decreases in photosynthetic rate at high tem- 
perature when using mutants/transgenic plants in Arabidopsis (Salvucci et al. 2006),  
rice (Yamori et al. 2012), and tobacco (Yamori and von Caemmerer 2009). Also, the  
overexpression  of  Rubisco  activase  from  maize  into  rice  stimulated  the  Rubisco  
activation state and photosynthetic rate at high temperature (Yamori et al.  2012).  
Moreover, transgenic Arabidopsis expressing thermotolerant Rubisco activase iso- 
forms generated by either gene shuffling technology (Kurek et al. 2007) or chimeric  
Rubisco activase constructs (Kumar et al. 2009) improved photosynthesis, biomass  
production, and seed yield. In addition, the introduction of Rubisco activase from  
cotton into a cool-season species such as Camelina resulted in improvement in the  
thermotolerance of photosynthesis (Carmo-Silva and Salvucci  2012). This is also  
supported  by  a  recent  report  stating  that  genes  encoding  thermostable  Rubisco  

----------------------- Page 51-----------------------

38                                                                                W. Yamori 

activase from a wild relative (Oryza australiensis) were overexpressed in domesti- 
cated rice (O. sativa), leading to an improvement in plant growth and seed yield in  
rice under heat stress (Scafaro et al. 2018). Taken together, Rubisco activase activity  
would constitute a major limiting factor for photosynthesis under high temperature  
and engineering Rubisco activase would be an efficient way to improve crop yield  
under high temperatures. The structure of Rubisco activase has already been deter- 
mined, providing insight into its interactions with Rubisco (Stotz et al. 2011) and its  
counterpart CbbX in red algae (Mueller-Cajar et al. 2011). This structural informa- 
tion  coupled  with  the  knowledge  of  regulation  in  Rubisco  activase  will  help  to  
improve its thermostability and catalytic properties. 

4     Increasing CO2  Concentration Around Rubisco 

Photosynthesis in C  plants is limited by the large drawdown in CO  concentrations 3 2 
from the atmosphere to the Rubisco catalytic sites in chloroplasts. The CO  diffu-2 
sion conductance responsible for this drawdown is attributed to the stomatal pores  
and the paths across the mesophyll from the cell surface to the Rubisco catalytic  
sites in chloroplasts (Evans et al. 2009). Increasing CO  concentration in chloro-2 
plasts and thereby minimizing photorespiration is therefore a promising target in  
terms of increasing photosynthetic rate in crops. CO  diffusion to the chloroplast 2 
can be influenced by modifying conductance through the stomata (stomatal conduc- 
tance) to the intercellular air space, either by increasing stomatal density (Tanaka  
et al.  2013) or by preventing stomatal closure (Kusumi et al.  2012; Yamori et al.  
2020). Both approaches would result in increases in photosynthetic rate at the cost  
of higher transpiration rates and lower water-use efficiency. 
    An alternative approach addresses the other major diffusion conductance route  
for CO  from the intercellular air space into the mesophyll cell chloroplasts (meso-2 
phyll  conductance).  In  contrast  to  modifying  stomatal  conductance,  increasing  
mesophyll conductance does not negatively affect water-use efficiency. The resis- 
tance of the cell wall (25–50%) and chloroplast (24–76%) accounts for most of the  
total resistance (Evans et al. 2009), meaning that CO  diffusion can potentially be 2 
improved  by  modifying  plants  so  that  they  have  smaller  mesophyll  cells  (i.e.,  a  
higher surface area of the chloroplasts is exposed to intercellular air spaces, Sc) with  
thinner  cell  walls  (Terashima  et  al.  2011).  The  second  important  component  of  
mesophyll conductance involves CO  diffusion through the plasma and chloroplast 2 
membranes  (Evans  et  al.  2009),  and  several  approaches  are  being  developed  to  
increase CO  concentration in chloroplasts in C  plants by increasing membrane 2 3 
permeability for CO . Aquaporins that are permeable to CO  are proteins that assist 2 2 
CO  diffusion through the membranes by providing pores through which CO  can 2         2 
be channeled (Kaldenhoff 2012). It has been shown that disruption to the aquaporin  
AtPIP1;2 gene limits CO  transport across the membrane (Heckwolf et al.  2011), 2 
while the overexpression of different aquaporin genes results in increased g   (Hanba  
                                                                                  m 

et al. 2004; Flexas et al. 2006). Furthermore, it has been shown that the expression  

----------------------- Page 52-----------------------

Strategies for Engineering Photosynthesis for Enhanced Plant Biomass Production              39 

of an aquaporin in A. thaliana stimulates CO  flux through a mesophyll membrane 2 
(Uehlein et al. 2012). 
    Once CO  is transferred to the cytosol, it is partially converted into HCO − to  
               2                                                                          3 
facilitate its diffusion into the chloroplast, and the HCO3− is then dehydrated back  

to CO  by carbonic anhydrase to maintain a high CO  flux through the chloroplast 2 2 
membrane. Thus, carbonic anhydrase plays a role in facilitating the diffusion of CO  2 
in the chloroplast stroma by interconverting between CO  and HCO − (Evans et al.  
                                                                  2           3 

2009). It has been suggested that the amount of carbonic anhydrase found in plants  
somewhat limits conductance in the stroma of C  crops, and thus there would be a 3 
possibility to improve this aspect by molecular engineering (Tholen and Zhu 2011). 
   A substantial increase in the CO  concentration around Rubisco to enhance pho-2 
tosynthesis and water-use efficiency has been expected as the result of the installa- 
tion of a carbon concentrating mechanism (CCM) in C  plants (Fig. 4). Cyanobacteria 3 
have evolved a CCM in which Rubisco is encapsulated in a cellular compartment  
known as a carboxysome (Price et al. 2011). In carboxysomes, CO  concentration is 2 
enriched by up to 1000-fold, thus significantly decreasing the photorespiration rate.  

                          C 
                          e                                       Chloroplast 
                          l 
                          l 
                            
                                                     H+ 
                         w                 + 
                          a 
                                        Na 
                          l 
                          l 
                                 CO  pump2 
                                    bicA 
                                    sbtA 

                                                    Na+ 

                                          - 
                                   HCO3             HCO3- 

                                 C 
                                 A 
                                                        CA           O2           Peroxisome 
                                                           Rubisco 
                                                    CO2 
CO2                CO2              CO2 
                                                         Carboxysome 
       s 
       t 
       o 
       m                          a 
       a                         q 
       t                          u 
       a 
                                  a 
                                 p 
                                                                         CO2 
                                  o 
                                  r 
                                  i 
                                  n                                             Mitochondrion 

              Intercellular 
              air space             Cytosol 

Fig. 4   Schematic diagram of mechanisms for concentrating CO  around Rubisco. The diagram 2 
shows CO  transfers from the outside to the intercellular air space through the stomatal pore and 2 
the CO  diffuses through the cell wall and plasma membrane into the cytosol. Aquaporins assist the 2 
CO  diffusion into the cytosol of the mesophyll cell through the membranes by providing pores 2 
through which CO  can be channeled. Introducing a cyanobacterial HCO − transporter (e.g., bicA  
                  2                                                     3 

and  sbtA)  into  the  chloroplast  envelope  could  improve  CO   transport.  The  introduction  of  a 2 
Rubisco- and carbonic-anhydrase-containing compartment, such as the carboxysome, could fur- 
ther increase the CO  concentration around Rubisco, resulting in minimization of the photorespira-2 
tion rate. (The figure is adapted from Price et al. (2011) and Yamori et al. (2016b)) 

----------------------- Page 53-----------------------

40                                                                                      W. Yamori 

To incorporate CCM from cyanobacteria into C  plants, the following distinct fea-3 
tures need to be addressed: (1) CO  and HCO − transport mechanism and (2) func- 
                                          2            3 
tional  carboxysome  assembly.  Incorporating  cyanobacterial  HCO3−  transporters  

into the chloroplast envelope of C  plants would provide a parallel route for inor-3 
ganic carbon to enter the chloroplast, in addition to the diffusion of dissolved CO  2 
(Price et al. 2011, 2013). To date, five different inorganic carbon transport mecha- 
nisms have been identified in cyanobacteria (Price et al.  2011, 2013). A previous  
study showed that overexpressing the ictB gene, an HCO3− transporter in cyanobac- 

teria, in A. thaliana and N. tabacum plants contributed more to increases in photo- 
synthesis  and  water-use  efficiency  than  in  the  wild  type  (Lieman-Hurwitz  et  al.  
2003). Furthermore, the overexpression of the ictB gene in soybeans led to increases  
in mesophyll conductance, photosynthesis, and plant productivity in both ambient  
and elevated CO  environments under both greenhouse and field conditions (Hay 2 
et al. 2017). It is now considered that a fully functional CCM in C  plants would 3 
require the introduction of HCO3− transporters, adjustments in the expression of  
chloroplast carbonic anhydrase to allow HCO3− accumulation, and the establish- 

ment of a Rubisco- and carbonic-anhydrase-containing compartment, such as a car- 
boxysome  (Price  et  al.   2011,  2013).  Recently,  well-assembled  carboxysome  
structures were successfully expressed in plants (Long et al. 2018). Incorporation of  
cyanobacterial Rubisco large and small subunit genes along with genes for carboxy- 
some structural proteins could improve Rubisco catalytic properties, but decrease  
total Rubisco content, resulting in lower photosynthetic rates and growth than in  
tobacco wild-type (Long et al.  2018). Since the incorporation of CCM into crops  
has  been  expected  to  improve  crop  yields,  efforts  toward  transplantation  are  
under way. 
    C  plants evolved CCM in two types of photosynthetic cells, where CO  is ini-4        2 
tially fixed in the mesophyll cells by the enzyme phosphoenolpyruvate carboxylase  
(PEPC) to produce a C  acid. The organic acid diffuses to the bundle-sheath cells, 4 
where it is decarboxylated, resulting in significantly increased CO  concentrations 2 
around Rubisco. Currently, considerable efforts are under way to incorporate the  
features of the complex C  pathway into C  crops such as rice (Covshoff and Hibberd 4 3 
2012; von Caemmerer et al. 2012). Challenges associated with this approach include  
morphological adjustments, such as the establishment of a Kranz(-like) anatomy, as  
well as the introduction of C  biochemistry into C  leaves. The benefits of the intro-4 3 
duction of the C  photosynthetic pathway would include higher yield as well as 4 
improved nitrogen-use efficiency and water-use efficiency. 

5     Enhancing Activity of Calvin–Benson-Cycle Enzymes 

The  Calvin–Benson  cycle  uses  ATP  and  NADPH  from  photosynthetic  electron  
transport to fix CO  in carbon skeletons that are mainly used for sucrose and starch 2 
production (Fig. 2). The Calvin–Benson cycle also supplies intermediates to many  
other  pathways  in  the  chloroplast,  including  the  shikimate  pathway  for  the  

----------------------- Page 54-----------------------

Strategies for Engineering Photosynthesis for Enhanced Plant Biomass Production               41 

biosynthesis  of  amino  acids,  lignin,  isoprenoid,  and  precursors  for  nucleotide  
metabolism  and  cell  wall  synthesis. This  cycle  comprises  11  different  enzymes,  
catalyzes 13 reactions, and is initiated by Rubisco (Raines  2003). Four of the 11  
enzymes are regulated by thioredoxins: glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate dehydrogenase  
(GAPDH),  fructose  1,6-bisphosphatase  (FBPase),  sedoheptulose-1,7-bisphospha- 
tase (SBPase), and phosphoribulokinase (PRK). Two of the 11 enzymes catalyze  
reversible reactions: aldolase and transketolase. 
    Previous studies have demonstrated that moderate reductions in Calvin–Benson-  
cycle  enzymes  such  as  SBPase  and  fructose  1,6-bisphosphate  aldolase  (FBPA)  
induce significant decreases in photosynthetic rate and plant growth, indicating that  
these enzymes would limit photosynthesis (Ding et al.  2016; Haake et al.  1998,  
1999; Harrison et al.  1998,  2001; Lawson et al. 2006; Ölcer et al. 2001; Raines  
2003; Raines and Paul 2006; Raines et al. 1999; Hatano-Iwasaki and Ogawa 2012).  
Furthermore, the disruption of the chloroplastic FBPase was also shown to nega- 
tively affect photosynthetic rate (Kossmann et al. 1994; Rojas-González et al. 2015;  
Sahrawy et al. 2004). These results strongly suggest that photosynthetic CO  fixa-2 
tion  could  be  improved  by  increasing  the  activity  of  individual  Calvin–Benson-  
cycle  enzymes.  Evidence  supporting  this  hypothesis  was  provided  by  transgenic  
tobacco plants overexpressing SBPase (Lefebvre et al.  2005; Tamoi et al. 2006),  
FBPase  (Tamoi  et  al.  2006),  the  cyanobacterial  bifunctional  SBPase/FBPase  
(Miyagawa et al. 2001), or FBPA (Uematsu et al. 2012). These single manipulations  
resulted in increases in photosynthetic rate and plant growth. Recently, SBPase has  
been  receiving  a  lot  of  attention,  and  its  role  in  determining  carbon  flux  in  the  
Calvin–Benson  cycle  under  natural  environmental  conditions  has  been  revealed.  
Transgenic  tobacco  plants  overexpressing  SBPase  from A.  thaliana  exhibited  an  
enhanced photosynthetic rate and biomass production when grown under free-air  
CO   enrichment  (FACE)  conditions  at  a  CO   concentration  of  585  μmol/mol 2 2 
(Rosenthal  et  al.  2011).  Moreover,  the  expression  of  cyanobacterial  bifunctional  
FBPase/SBPase increases photosynthetic rate in soybeans grown under field condi- 
tions  and  prevents  yield  losses  under  high-CO   and  high-temperature  conditions 2 
(Köhler et al. 2016). In addition, transgenic lines with increased SBPase exhibited  
improvement of leaf photosynthesis, total biomass, and seed yield in wheat under  
greenhouse conditions (Driever et al.  2017). Taken together, the manipulation of  
SBPase  could  increase  photosynthetic  capacity  and  could  be  an  efficient  way  to  
improve photosynthetic rate and crop yield, especially in a future high-CO  world.2 

6     Enhancing Electron Transport Rate  
     in Thylakoid Membranes 

ATP and NADPH generated during photosynthetic electron transport in thylakoid  
membranes are used to power photosynthetic carbon reduction. In a future high- 
 CO  world, CO  assimilation rate would be limited by the RuBP regeneration rate in 2 2 
the Calvin–Benson cycle (Farquhar et al.  1980), which in turn will be limited by  

----------------------- Page 55-----------------------

42                                                                                          W. Yamori 

chloroplast electron transport capacity (Yamori et al.  2011). The cytochrome b /f 6 
complex has a unique role in chloroplast electron transport (Fig. 5) as it can act in  
both linear electron transport (production of ATP and NADPH) and cyclic electron  
transport (ATP generation only). There is a strong linear relationship between chlo- 
roplast electron transport rate and cytochrome b /f complex content at any leaf tem-6 
perature  (Yamori  et  al.  2011).  Thus,  this  could  be  a  suitable  target  for  genetic  
manipulation to improve photosynthesis and thus plant yield. 
    Previous  experiments  with  antisense  lines  have  shown  that  even  a  moderate  
decrease  in  the  amounts  of  chloroplastic  ferredoxin  NADP(H)  oxidoreductase  
(FNR), which catalyzes the terminal reaction of the photosynthetic electron trans- 
                                                                                        + 
port chain by transferring electrons from reduced ferredoxin to NADP  , has a nega- 
tive  impact  on  photosynthetic  rate  under  both  low  and  high  light  conditions  
(Hajirezaei  et  al.  2002).  However,  the  overexpression  of  FNR  (Rodriguez  et  al.  

                                                   NADPH 
  Stroma                                                   NADP+ 
  (pH ≒ 8) 
                                                       FNR 
                                                     Fd 

             PS II    Plasto     Cyt               PS I 
                     quinone     b /f 
                                  6 

                                         Plasto 
                                        cyanin 
                                                                                                 ATP 
          H O    O  + H+        H+                                    ATP 
            2      2 
                                                                     synthase 
  Lumen                                                     H+ 
  (pH ≒ 6)                                                                                       ADP 

                       H+ 

             3                                /  1 
             A                    3            1 N 
             E                    K            t C 
             K                    P            s C 
                                  T            e 
                                               B V 

        K+                       K+          Cl- 

Fig.  5   Schematic  diagram  of  electron  transport  in  thylakoid  membranes.  Electron  transport,  
driven by the excitation of photosystem I (PS I) and photosystem II (PS II), results in the reduction  
of NADP+ to NADPH and the accumulation of protons in the thylakoid lumen. The resulting pro- 

ton motive force (pmf ), which constitutes  ∆pH across the thylakoid membrane as well as mem- 
brane potential (Δψ), is used to produce ATP through ATP synthase. Linear electron transport  
generates both ATP and NADPH, whereas cyclic electron transport produces ATP without produc- 
ing NADPH. Several ion channels, such as the thylakoid K+                           + 
                                                                  channel TPK3, K  efflux antiporters  
              − 
KEA, and Cl   channel Best1/VCCN1, would adjust  Δψ and  ΔpH and function to fine-tune pmf  
and thus electron transport via pH-dependent NPQ. PS II: photosystem II, Cyt b f, cytochrome b /f 6   6 
                                                                           + 
complex, PS I: photosystem I, Fd: ferredoxin. FNR: ferredoxin-NADP  reductase 

----------------------- Page 56-----------------------

Strategies for Engineering Photosynthesis for Enhanced Plant Biomass Production                 43 

2007) or ferredoxin (Yamamoto et al. 2006) did not increase photosynthesis or plant  
growth in tobacco, irrespective of growth light conditions. Electron transfer between  
the  cytochrome  b /f  complex  and  photosystem  I  is  mediated  by  plastocyanin  in 6 
higher plants, whereas, in many algae, it is mediated by cytochrome c6. Variations  
in plastocyanin levels have been reported to coincide with variations in photosyn- 
thetic electron transport activity (Burkey  1994; Burkey et al. 1996; Schöttler et al.  
2004), leading to the conclusion that plastocyanin pool size could limit photosyn- 
thetic electron transport. It has been reported that the introduction of a parallel elec- 
tron carrier between the cytochrome b /f complex and photosystem I through the 6 
expression of an algal cytochrome c6 gene in A. thaliana improved electron trans- 
port  rate,  leading  to  improved  plant  growth  (Chida  et  al.  2007). An  analysis  of  
knockout plants for two homologous plastocyanin isoforms (PETE1 and PETE2) in  
A. thaliana showed that plastocyanin content can be significantly decreased with no  
apparent changes in photosynthetic rate, suggesting that the concentration of plas- 
tocyanin does not limit photosynthetic electron transport rate (Pesaresi et al. 2009).  
However, the overexpression of either PETE1 or  PETE2 results in an increase in  
biomass production (Pesaresi et al. 2009). Thus, there is still a discrepancy between  
the experimental knockout data and the overexpression lines. 
    It was also shown in antisense studies that decreasing Rieske FeS protein content  
resulted in a decrease in cytochrome b /f complex level, leading to a decrease in 6 
photosynthetic electron transport, plant biomass, and seed yield in tobacco and rice  
(Price et al.  1998; Yamori et al. 2016a). These findings identified the cytochrome  
b /f complex as a limiting step in electron transport and would suggest that the over-6 
expression of Rieske FeS protein could be a suitable target for increasing photosyn- 
thesis and yield. This has been proven by recent work showing that the overexpression  
of Rieske FeS protein had a substantial and significant impact on electron transport,  
plant biomass, and seed yield in Arabidopsis plants (Simkin et al. 2017). 
    Other reports have documented an enhancement in plant biomass realized by the  
genetic manipulation of photosynthetic electron transport. In plant cells, NADP is  
                                                           + 
mainly  located  in  the  chloroplast,  where  NADP   functions  as  the  final  electron  
acceptor of the photosynthetic electron transport chain (Wigge et al.  1993). NAD  
kinase regulates the NAD(H)/NADP(H) balance through its catalysis of NAD phos- 
phorylation in the presence of ATP (Kawai and Murata 2008). In A. thaliana , one of  
the NADK isoforms localized in the chloroplast (NADK2; Chai et al. 2005) cata- 
lyzes a key step in the regulation of NAD/NADP ratio (Kawai and Murata 2008).  
The overexpression of chloroplastic NADK2 from Arabidopsis plants into rice suc- 
ceeded  in  enhancing  electron  transport  and  CO   assimilation  rates  (Takahara 2 
et al. 2010). 
    In  situations  in  which  the  electron  transport  rate  is  limited  by  the  amount  of  
available light that can be absorbed by the plant, increased light harvesting might  
enhance photosynthetic rate and plant productivity. Land plants use chlorophyll a  
and b, which absorb light at wavelengths of 400–700 nm. Chlorophyll d, which is  
used by Acaryochloris (Miyashita et al. 1996), and chlorophyll f , which was discov- 
ered in the cyanobacterial communities of stromatolites (Chen et al.  2010), have  
red-shifted absorption spectra that enable their host organisms to perform oxygenic  

----------------------- Page 57-----------------------

44                                                                             W. Yamori 

photosynthesis at the much longer wavelengths of 700–750 nm, which are inacces- 
sible to other organisms. Introducing these chlorophylls into higher plants to sup- 
plement or replace the existing chlorophylls could potentially increase the amount  
of usable photon flux by up to 19% (Chen and Blankenship 2011). The up-regula- 
tion of Arabidopsis chlorophyllide a oxygenase (CAO), involved in chlorophyll  b  
biosynthesis, in tobacco has been shown to increase electron transport rate, CO  2 
assimilation, and plant biomass (Biswal et al. 2012). In addition, plants with a muta- 
tion in TAP38, an enzyme involved in the dephosphorylation of the light harvesting  
complex  of  photosystem  II,  exhibited  an  increased  photosynthetic  electron  flow,  
leading to improved plant growth under low-light conditions (Pribil et al. 2010). In  
the  same  manner,  facilitation  of  the  chloroplast  accumulation  response,  which  
shows that chloroplasts accumulate along periclinal cell walls at low light, led to  
improved leaf photosynthesis and plant biomass production in A. thaliana (Gotoh  
et al. 2018). Since the photosynthetic electron transport chain provides energy and  
reducing equivalents for the reduction of fixed CO  to carbohydrates in the Calvin–2 
Benson cycle as well as for nitrogen assimilation and other processes, the genetic  
manipulation of photosynthetic electron transport could be a candidate for improv- 
ing the entire photosynthetic system, and thus plant yield. 

7     Improving Photosynthetic Performance Under Fluctuating  
     Light in Natural Environments 

Research into finding ways to increase crop yield has focused on improving steady-  
state photosynthesis. However, leaves in natural plant canopies experience a highly  
variable light environment over the course of a day because of changes in cloud  
cover and overshadowing canopy cover (Fig. 6; Yamori 2016). By contrast, trans- 
genic plants have not yet been used to clarify the limiting step of non-steady-state  
photosynthesis, and thus few studies address the improvement of non-steady-state  
photosynthesis. When light intensity is increased suddenly after a prolonged period  
of low light or darkness, photosynthetic rate increases gradually over several min- 
utes and approaches a steady state (Pearcy  1990; Yamori 2016). This phenomenon  
has been termed “photosynthetic induction,” and it is typically divided into three  
limiting  phases:  (1)  electron  transport  systems;  (2)  activation  of  Calvin-cycle  
enzymes, especially Rubisco; and (3) CO  diffusion into the chloroplast (Fig.  6). 2 
The first of these three phases is often completed within 1–2 min of increases in  
irradiance, the second requires 5–10 min, and the third could take 10–30 min to  
reach a steady-state (Pearcy 1990). The slow induction results in a time lag between  
the changes in irradiance and those in the photosynthetic rate. This delay may cause  
damage to the photosynthetic apparatus and eventually decrease plant productivity  
if excess energy accumulates during repeated fluctuations in light intensity (Murchie  
and Niyogi 2011; Tikkanen et al. 2012; Yamori 2016; Yamori et al. 2016c). Daily  
photosynthetic rates under fluctuating light conditions can be up to 20–35% lower  

----------------------- Page 58-----------------------

Strategies for Engineering Photosynthesis for Enhanced Plant Biomass Production  45 

      1200 
 y                                                              High light 
t  ) 
i   s 
 s  /  900 
 n  2 
 e  m                                          r 
t  /                                           o    1. Electron transport 
 n  l                                          t 
i   o                                          c 
t      600 
h   m                                          a 
 g  μ                                          F    2. Calvin-Benson 
i  ( 
L                                              g 
       300                                     n 
                                               i 
                                               t 
                                               i    3. CO2  diffusion 
                                               m 
          0                                    i 
                                               L 
             0      3      6      9     12 
 e      20 
t 
 a 
 r 
     )                                          e 
 c  s                                          t 
i  /     15 
t                                               a 
 e 2                                            r  
h   m                                           c 
t  /                                           i 
 n  l                                          t 
 y  o    10                                     e 
 s  m                                          h              Photosynthetic 
                                               t 
 o  μ                                           n 
t  (                                            y                Induction 
 o        5                                     s 
h                                               o 
P                                              t 
                                                o 
          0                                    h 
                                               P 
             0      3      6      9     12 
                                                          Time (min) 
                     Time (hours) 

Fig. 6   Representative responses of photosynthetic rate under field light conditions. The natural  
light fluctuations were mimicked in portable photosynthesis systems (LI-6400XT), and the photo- 
synthetic rates at a CO2 concentration of 400  μmol/mol were measured under these light condi- 
tions. Three arrows in the right figure indicate major biochemical processes limiting photosynthetic  
induction with different time courses 

than the optimal photosynthetic rates under constant light (Naumburg and Ellsworth  
2002; Taylor and Long 2017). Therefore, characterization of the mechanisms that  
regulate  photosynthetic  responses  to  fluctuating  light  intensities  may  lead  to  
improved photosynthetic induction and crop yield under natural conditions (Tanaka  
et  al.  2019).  The  following  section  summarizes  the  various  genetic  engineering  
approaches that can be used to enhance photosynthesis under fluctuating light con- 
ditions (Fig. 7). 

7.1    Electron Transport  

Photosynthetic electron transport systems consist of linear and cyclic electron trans- 
port around photosystem I (Fig.  7). Linear electron transport generates both ATP  
and NADPH for a Calvin–Benson cycle, photorespiration, and other metabolisms.  
On  the  other  hand,  cyclic  electron  transport  produces  ATP  without  producing  
NADPH to balance the ATP/NADPH production ratio and is now considered to be  

----------------------- Page 59-----------------------

                                                                                                                                                                                                            4 
                                                                                                                                                                                                            6 

                                                                                                                                                                                                           W 
                                                                                                                                                                                                           . 
                                                                                                                                                                                                             
                                                                                                                                                                                                           Y 
Fig. 7   Strategies for engineering steady-state and non-steady-state photosynthesis. The possible targets would be (1) Rubisco catalysis; (2) Rubisco activase;  
                                                                                                                                                                                                           a 
(3) photorespiratory bypass; (4) stomatal opening; (5) introduction of C  cycle; (6) introduction of CO  pump from cyanobacteria; (7) light-induced activation                                             m 
                                                                                         4                                     2 
                                                                                                                                                                                                           o 
of enzymes in the Calvin–Benson cycle by ferredoxin-thioredoxin (TRX) system; (8) electron transport including cyclic electron flow via PGR5-PGRL1 and                                                     r 
                                                                                                                                                                                                           i 
NDH complex, flavodiiron protein (Flv), and various ion channels/transporters across chloroplast envelopes and thylakoid membranes (i.e., Best1/VCCN1,  
TPK3, KEA3); and (9) thermal dissipation of excess absorbed light via the protonation of PsbS protein and the activation of a xanthophyll cycle 

----------------------- Page 60-----------------------

Strategies for Engineering Photosynthesis for Enhanced Plant Biomass Production                47 

essential in providing protection from photodamage via the thermal dissipation of  
excess absorbed light (NPQ, non-photochemical quenching) (Yamori and Shikanai  
2016). There are two cyclic electron flows around photosystem I: the main pathway  
depends on PGR5/PGRL1 proteins and the minor pathway depends on a chloroplast  
NADH dehydrogenase-like (NDH) complex. It has been shown in rice that PGR5/ 
PGRL1-dependent cyclic electron transport is a key regulator of rapid photosyn- 
thetic responses to high light intensity under fluctuating light, and that both PGR5/ 
PGRL1-dependent and NDH-dependent cyclic electron transport have physiologi- 
cal roles for photoprotection in sustaining photosynthesis and plant growth in rice  
under repeated light fluctuations (Yamori et al.  2016c). In cyanobacteria, pseudo-  
cyclic electron transport by flavodiiron protein (Flv) mediates the photoreduction of  
O  to H O and is essential for photosystem-I photoprotection in fluctuating light 2 2 
(Allahverdiyeva et al. 2013). Recent work indicated that the introduction of the Flv  
gene  from  moss  (Physcomitrella  patens)  into  Arabidopsis  and  rice  led  to  the  
enhancement of cyclic electron transport, resulting in successful improvement of  
the  resistance  of  photosynthetic  machinery  under  fluctuating  light  conditions  
(Fig. 7; Yamamoto et al. 2016; Wada et al. 2018). 
    NPQ can be activated and relaxed within minutes and is a highly regulatory pro- 
cess  involving  multiple  factors,  such  as  the  protonation  of  PsbS  protein  and  the  
activation  of  a  xanthophyll  cycle  that  converts  the  pigment  violaxanthin  (V)  to  
antheraxanthin (A) and zeaxanthin (Z) (for a review, see Yamori and Shikanai 2016).  
In tobacco, the simultaneous overexpression of PsbS, violaxanthin de-epoxidase,  
and zeaxanthin epoxidase increases the rate of NPQ relaxation, which subsequently  
increases growth under fluctuating light in field conditions (Fig. 7; Kromdijk et al.  
2016). Thus, plant productivity and crop yield appear to be highly dependent on  
NPQ under fluctuating light conditions in nature. 
    It has been reported that ion channels/transporters across chloroplast enve- 
lopes and thylakoid membranes play fundamental roles in the regulation of pho- 
tosynthetic electron transport (Figs. 5 and 7; Finazzi et al. 2015). Photosynthetic  
electron  transport  is  coupled  with  proton  translocation  across  the  thylakoid  
                                                                      + 
membrane, resulting in the formation of transmembrane H  concentration (ΔpH)  
and electrical potential (ΔΨ) gradients. Although both ΔpH and Δψ contribute  
to ATP synthesis as a proton motive force (pmf ), only the ΔpH component can  
activate the PsbS- and xanthophyll-cycle-dependent NPQ while down-regulat- 
ing electron transport during the plastoquinol oxidation step at the cytochrome  
b /f complex (photosynthetic control, Kramer et al. 2003; Yamori and Shikanai 6 
2016). Recent evidence suggests that several ion channels, such as the thylakoid  
  +                       +                                       − 
K  channel TPK3, K  efflux antiporter KEA3, and Cl   channel Best1/VCCN1,  
adjust electron transport and functions in photoprotective mechanisms (Figs. 5  
and 7; Carraretto et al. 2013; Kunz et al. 2014; Duan et al. 2016; Herdean et al.  
                                                                                      − 
2016). The knockout of Best1/VCCN1, which leads to an influx of Cl   into the  
lumen, resulted in disturbance of the pmf  components, resulting in a decreased  
rate of NPQ induction (Duan et al. 2016; Herdean et al. 2016). These data sug- 
                − 
gest that a Cl   influx into the lumen would fine-tune pmf  and allow the plant to  
                                                                                                + 
adjust  photosynthesis  to  variable  light.  On  the  other  hand, TPK3  effluxes  K   

----------------------- Page 61-----------------------

48                                                                                                           W. Yamori 

from  the  thylakoid  lumen  to  the  stroma  and  partially  dissipates  ΔΨ  to  allow  
            + 
more H  to enter the lumen and thus enables a significant  ΔpH to be formed,  
thus balancing photoprotection and photochemical efficiency (Carraretto et al.  
                                                       +                                              + 
2013). Moreover, KEA3 effluxes H  with the counter influx of K  , exchanging  
Δψ for  ΔpH, which is critical for photosynthetic acclimation after transitions  
from high to low light (Kunz et al. 2014; Armbruster et al. 2014). The activity  
of  KEA3  accelerates  the  down-regulation  of  pH-dependent  NPQ  after  transi- 
tions to low light, leading to the faster recovery of high photosystem II quantum  
efficiency and increased CO  assimilation. The overexpression of KEA3 accel-2 
erates the relaxation of photoprotective energy-dependent quenching after tran- 
sitions  from  high  to  low  light  in Arabidopsis  and  tobacco  (Armbruster  et  al.  
2016). Thus, the KEA3 function is critical in terms of realizing high photosyn- 
thetic efficiency under fluctuating light. Taken together, these findings under- 
score  the  potential  for  accelerating  NPQ  relaxation  once  light  intensity  is  
decreased so as not to decrease the efficiency of light energy use under light- 
limiting  conditions  in  improving  photosynthetic  efficiency  under  fluctuating  
light in field conditions (Fig. 7). 

7.2       Activation of Calvin-Cycle Enzymes, Especially Rubisco  

Rubisco must be activated by Rubisco activase to catalyze CO  assimilation in the 2 
Calvin–Benson cycle (Fig. 7). A positive relationship has been observed between  
Rubisco activase content and the speed of the photosynthetic induction response in  
A.  thaliana  (Mott  et  al.  1997),  tobacco  (Hammond  et  al.  1998; Yamori  and  von  
Caemmerer 2009), and rice (Masumoto et al. 2012; Yamori et al. 2012). Thus, it is  
considered that the Rubisco activation state could be a limiting factor for the induc- 
tion response to a sudden increase in light intensity. In most species, Rubisco acti- 
vase is present in two isoforms: redox-regulated  α-isoform and redox-insensitive  
β-isoform  (Portis  Jr  2003).  In  transgenic Arabidopsis  plants  containing  only  the  
β-isoform, photosynthetic induction after a transition from low to high light was  
faster than in the wild type, as Rubisco activase activity was constitutively high and  
independent  of  irradiance  (Carmo-Silva  and  Salvucci  2013;  Kaiser  et  al.  2016).  
Furthermore, the overexpression of β-isoform from maize in rice led to an improve- 
ment in photosynthetic induction via the rapid regulation of the Rubisco activation  
state by Rubisco activase following an increase in light intensity and/or the mainte- 
nance of a high Rubisco activation state under low light (Yamori et al. 2012). Taken  
together, modifying the concentration of Rubisco activase and its composition could  
be used to improve photosynthetic performance and plant growth under fluctuating  
light conditions. 
     Thioredoxins are ubiquitous enzymes in chloroplasts, and the thioredoxin sys- 
tems are responsible for the light-induced activation of enzymes in the Calvin– 
Benson cycle, including GAPDH, FBPase, SBPase, and PRK (Thormählen et al.  
2017);   ATP   synthesis   (Hisabori   et   al.   2013);   malate-oxaloacetate   shuttle  

----------------------- Page 62-----------------------

Strategies for Engineering Photosynthesis for Enhanced Plant Biomass Production                49 

(Miginiac- Maslow et al. 2000); and starch metabolism (Thormählen et al. 2013).  
There are two plastid thioredoxins systems: (1) the ferredoxin-thioredoxin sys- 
tem, which consists of ferredoxin-thioredoxin reductase (FTR) and multiple thio- 
redoxins, and (2) the NADPH-dependent thioredoxin reductase (NTRC) system,  
which contains a complete thioredoxin system (Fig. 7). Recent reports focusing  
on the overexpression of chloroplast thioredoxin components in plants support the  
concept of the high impact of thioredoxins on plant fitness. Transgenic tobacco  
lines overexpressing thioredoxin f , one of the thioredoxin families, showed a large  
increase in plant biomass and starch content, which was further stimulated by an  
increase in light intensity (Sanz-Barrio et al.  2013). The overexpression of the  
endogenous NTRC gene in Arabidopsis also increased plant growth under moder- 
ate light intensity (Toivola et al. 2013). Furthermore, a recent study showed that  
both  ferredoxin-dependent  thioredoxin  m,  one  of  the  thioredoxin  families,  and  
NADPH-dependent  NTRC  are  indispensable  for  photosynthetic  acclimation  in  
fluctuating light intensities (Nikkanen et al. 2016; Thormählen et al. 2017). Thus,  
it is highly possible that thioredoxin-mediated redox regulation allows the activa- 
tion state of these enzymes to be modulated in response to fluctuating light in field  
conditions. 

7.3      CO2  Diffusion into the Chloroplast 

The diffusion of CO  to the Rubisco catalytic sites in the chloroplast is mediated 2 
by both stomatal and mesophyll conductance (Fig. 7). Under naturally fluctuating  
environmental  conditions,  stomatal  responses  are  much  slower  than  photosyn- 
thetic  responses.  Manipulating  stomatal  conductance  so  that  it  responds  more  
quickly  to  irradiance  could  greatly  enhance  photosynthesis  and  water-use  effi- 
ciency in fluctuating irradiance (Lawson and Blatt  2014; Vialet-Chabrand et al.  
2017). Removal of the stomatal limitation could increase photosynthetic induc- 
tion  in  aba2-1  Arabidopsis  mutant,  which  impaired  ABA  synthesis  and  thus  
showed constitutively high stomatal conductance (Kaiser et al. 2016). Moreover,  
SLAC1-deficient rice mutant, which knocked out an anion channel protein in the  
plasma membrane of stomatal guard cells, constitutively opened stomata and con- 
tributed to higher photosynthetic rates more than the wild type in naturally fluctu- 
ating light (Yamori et al.  2020). Papanatsiou et al. (2019) induced a synthetic,  
                + 
light-gated K  channel in guard cells in Arabidopsis and succeeded in facilitating  
stomatal  opening  under  light  exposure  and  closing  after  irradiation,  leading  to  
greater plant growth in fluctuating light. Furthermore, several Arabidopsis mutants  
with stay-open stomata and the PATROL1 (proton ATPase translocation control 1)  
overexpression Arabidopsis line with faster stomatal opening responses exhibited  
higher  photosynthetic  rates  and  plant  growth  in  fluctuating  light  than  the  wild  
type, whereas those lines showed similar photosynthetic rates and plant growth in  
constant  light  (Shimadzu  et  al.  2019;  Kimura  et  al.  2020).  Taken  together,  

----------------------- Page 63-----------------------

50                                                                                  W. Yamori 

enhancing stomatal conductance could result in better use of plant photosynthetic  
capacity in naturally fluctuating light. 
   In addition to stomatal conductance, mesophyll conductance could place a large  
diffusional limitation on photosynthesis. The extent to which mesophyll conduc- 
tance limits photosynthesis under fluctuating light is largely unknown, although it  
has been reported that mesophyll conductance could impose a major limitation to  
photosynthesis  during  the  steady  state.  Mesophyll  conductance  can  vary  within  
minutes, and is affected by changes in irradiance, CO , and temperature (Flexas 2 
et al. 2007, 2008, 2012; Tazoe et al. 2011; Tholen et al. 2008; Yamori et al. 2006a),  
making it a potentially important process. Recently, we succeeded to characterize  
induction  both  of  mesophyll  conductance  and  stomatal  conductance  after  a  step  
change in light from darkness to high or low light and showed that mesophyll con- 
ductance  would  impose  a  smaller  limitation  to  photosynthesis  under  fluctuating  
light  conditions,  but  both  of  mesophyll  conductance  and  stomatal  conductance  
would contribute to the limitation of photosynthesis during induction (Sakoda et al.  
2021). Relevant factors that might contribute to variations in mesophyll conduc- 
tance are carbonic anhydrase and aquaporins. 

8     Future Prospects 

The present rate of increase in crop yields is insufficient to keep pace with the rapid  
increase in the global population. Thus, the development of crops with higher yield  
by improving photosynthesis is essential if we are to meet future food and energy  
demands. Therefore, suitable approaches must be explored for generating more effi- 
cient plants with higher yield. Enhancement of leaf photosynthetic capacity would  
provide one attractive way of achieving increases in crop yield since plant growth  
depends largely on photosynthesis. In this review, we have highlighted crucial tar- 
gets  that  could  be  manipulated  to  enhance  crop  productivity  (Fig.  7).  To  date,  
research into finding new ways to increase crop yield has focused on improving  
steady-state photosynthesis. However, leaves in natural plant canopies experience a  
highly variable light environment over the course of a day. Thus, the improvements  
in  photosynthesis  and  yield  observed  in  model  plants  grown  in  constant  growth  
chambers may not be completely transferrable to crop species under field condi- 
tions. Therefore, an understanding of the key factors operating in natural environ- 
ments and responsible for increases in yield is essential if we are to achieve the  
maximum yield potential. 
   Furthermore,  improving  photosynthesis  to  increase  food  production  ultimately  
means maximizing the photosynthetic efficiency of the crop canopy rather than that of  
an individual plant. One approach would be to alter the plant architecture and bio- 
chemistry and thus distribute irradiation more evenly throughout the canopy in order  
to  achieve  the  highest  conversion  efficiency  of  solar  radiation  to  biomass.  Recent  
genome editing technologies have been progressing and they will enable easier and  
more precise manipulation of the photosynthesis process in crops. Our understanding  
of photosynthesis will help us to achieve our goal of sustainable food production. 

----------------------- Page 64-----------------------

Strategies for Engineering Photosynthesis for Enhanced Plant Biomass Production                            51 

References 

Ainsworth EA, Leakey ADB, Ort DR, Long SP (2008) FACE-ing the facts: inconsistencies and  
    interdependence among field, chamber and modeling studies of elevated CO  impacts on crop 2 
    yield and food supply. New Phytol 179:5–9 
Alexandratos N, Bruinsma J (2012) World agriculture towards 2030/2050: the 2012 revision. ESA  
    Working paper No. 12-03. FAO, Rome 
Allahverdiyeva Y,  Mustila  H,  Ermakova  M,  Bersanini  L,  Richaud  P, Ajlani  G,  Battchikova  N,  
    Cournac L, Aro EM (2013) Flavodiiron proteins Flv1 and Flv3 enable cyanobacterial growth  
    and photosynthesis under fluctuating light. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 110:4111–4116 
Armbruster U, Carrillo LR, Venema K, Pavlovic L, Schmidtmann E, Kornfeld A, Jahns P, Berry  
    JA, Kramer DM, Jonikas MC (2014) Ion antiport accelerates photosynthetic acclimation in  
    fluctuating light environments. Nat Commun 5:5439 
Armbruster U, Leonelli L, Correa Galvis V, Strand D, Quinn EH, Jonikas MC, Niyogi KK (2016)  
    Regulation and levels of the thylakoid K+        + 
                                                  /H  antiporter KEA3 shape the dynamic response of  
    photosynthesis in fluctuating light. Plant Cell Physiol 57:1557–1567 
Ballantyne AP, Alden CB, Miller JB, Tans PP, White JWC (2012) Increase in observed net carbon  
    dioxide uptake by land and oceans during the last 50 years. Nature 488:70–72 
Biswal AK, Pattanayak GK, Pandey SS, Leelavathi S, Reddy VS, Govindjee, Tripathy BC (2012)  
    Light  intensity-dependent  modulation  of  chlorophyll  b  biosynthesis  and  photosynthesis  by  
    overexpression of chlorophyllide a oxygenase in tobacco. Plant Physiol 159:433–449 
Burkey KO (1994) Genetic variation of photosynthetic electron transport in barley: identification  
    of plastocyanin as a potential limiting factor. Plant Sci 98:177–187 
Burkey  KO,  Gizlice  Z,  Carter TE  (1996)  Genetic  variation  in  soybean  photosynthetic  electron  
    transport capacity is related to plastocyanin concentration in the chloroplast. Photosynth Res  
    49:141–149 
Busch FA, Sage TL, Cousins AB, Sage RF (2013) C3 plants enhance rates of photosynthesis by  
    reassimilating photorespired and respired CO . Plant Cell Environ 36:200–2122 
Carmo-Silva AE, Salvucci ME (2012) The temperature response of CO  assimilation, photochemi-2 
    cal activities and RuBisCO activation in Camelina sativa, a potential bioenergy crop with lim- 
    ited capacity for acclimation to heat stress. Planta 236:1433–1445 
Carmo-Silva  AE,  Salvucci  ME  (2013)  The  regulatory  properties  of  RuBisCO  activase  differ  
    among  species  and  affect  photosynthetic  induction  during  light  transitions.  Plant  Physiol  
    161:1645–1655 
Carraretto L, Formentin E, Teardo E, Checchetto V, Tomizioli M, Morosinotto T, Giacometti GM,  
    Finazzi G, Szabó I (2013) A thylakoid-located two-pore K+ channel controls photosynthetic  
    light utilization in plants. Science 342:114–118 
Carvalho J, Madgwick P, Powers S, Keys A, Lea P, Parry M (2012) An engineered pathway for  
    glyoxylate metabolism in tobacco plants aimed to avoid the release of ammonia in photorespi- 
    ration. BMC Biotechnol 11:111 
Chai MF, Chen QJ, An R, Chen YM, Chen J, Wang XC (2005) NADK2, an Arabidopsis chloro- 
    plastic NAD kinase, plays a vital role in both chlorophyll synthesis and chloroplast protection.  
    Plant Mol Biol 59:553–564 
Chen M, Blankenship RE (2011) Expanding the solar spectrum used by photosynthesis. Trends  
    Plant Sci 16:427–431 
Chen M, Schliep M, Willows RD, Cai Z-L, Neilan BA, Scheer H (2010) A red-shifted chlorophyll.  
    Science 329:1318–1319 
Chida H, Nakazawa A, Akazaki H, Hirano T, Suruga K, Ogawa M, Satoh T, Kadokura K, Yamada  
    S,  Hakamata  W  et  al  (2007)  Expression  of  the  algal  cytochrome  c6  gene  in  Arabidopsis  
    enhances photosynthesis and growth. Plant Cell Physiol 48:948–957 
Covshoff  S,  Hibberd  JM  (2012)  Integrating  C   photosynthesis  into  C   crops  to  increase  yield 4 3 
    potential. Curr Opin Biotechnol 23:209–214 

----------------------- Page 65-----------------------

52                                                                                           W. Yamori 

Crafts-Brandner SJ, Salvucci ME (2000) Rubisco activase constrains the photosynthetic potential  
    of leaves at high temperature and CO2 . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 97:13430–13435 
Ding  F, Wang  M,  Zhang  S, Ai  X  (2016)  Changes  in  SBPase  activity  influence  photosynthetic  
    capacity, growth, and tolerance to chilling stress in transgenic tomato plants. Sci Rep 32741 
Driever SM, Simkin AJ, Alotaibi S, Fisk SJ, Madgwick PJ, Sparks CA, Jones HD, Lawson T, Parry  
    MAJ, Raines CA (2017) Increased SBPase activity improves photosynthesis and grain yield  
    in wheat grown in greenhouse conditions. Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci 372:20160384 
Duan Z, Kong F, Zhang L, Li W, Zhang J, Peng L (2016) A bestrophin-like protein modulates  
    the  proton  motive  force  across  the  thylakoid  membrane  in Arabidopsis .  J  Integr  Plant  Biol  
    58:848–858 
Evans JR (1989) Photosynthesis and nitrogen relationships in leaves of C3 plants. Oecologia 78:9–19 
Evans JR, Kaldenhoff R, Genty B, Terashima I (2009) Resistances along the CO  diffusion path-2 
    way inside leaves. J Exp Bot 60:2235–2248 
Farquhar GD, von Caemmerer S, Berry JA (1980) A biochemical model of photosynthetic CO2  
    assimilation in leaves of C3 species. Planta 149:78–90 
Finazzi G, Petroutsos D, Tomizioli M, Flori S, Sautron E, Villanova V, Rolland N, Seigneurin-  
    Berny D (2015) Ions channels/transporters and chloroplast regulation. Cell Calcium 58:86–97 
Flexas J, Ribas-Carbó M, Hanson DT, Bota J, Otto B, Cifre J, McDowell N, Medrano H, Kaldenhoff  
    R (2006) Tobacco aquaporin NtAQP1 is involved in mesophyll conductance to CO2  in vivo.  
    Plant J 48:427–439 
Flexas J, Diaz-Espejo A, Galmés J, Kaldenhoff R, Medrano H, Ribas-Carbo M (2007) Rapid varia- 
    tions of mesophyll conductance in response to changes in CO2 concentration around leaves.  
    Plant Cell Environ 30:1284–1298 
Flexas J, Ribas-Carbó M, Diaz-Espejo A, Galmés J, Medrano H (2008) Mesophyll conductance to  
    CO2 : current knowledge and future prospects. Plant Cell Environ 31:602–621 
Flexas J, Barbour MM, Brendel O, Cabrera HM, Carriquí M, Diaz-Espejo A, Douthe C, Dreyer  
    E,  Ferrio  JP,  Gago  J,  Gallé A,  Galmés  J,  Kodama  N,  Medrano  H,  Niinemets  Ü,  Peguero-  
    Pina JJ, Pou A, Ribas-Carbó M, Tomás M, Tosens T, Warren CR, Gallé A (2012) Mesophyll  
    diffusion  conductance  to  CO2 :  an  unappreciated  central  player  in  photosynthesis.  Plant  Sci  
    193–194:70–84 
Furbank RT, Quick WP, Sirault XR (2015) Improving photosynthesis and yield potential in cereal  
    crops by targeted genetic manipulation: prospects, progress and challenges. Field Crops Res  
    182:19–29 
Gotoh E, Suetsugu N, Yamori W, Ishishita K, Kiyabu R, Fukuda M, Higa T, Shirouchi B, Wada  
    M (2018) Chloroplast accumulation response enhances leaf photosynthesis and plant biomass  
    production. Plant Physiol 178:1358–1369 
Gu J, Yin X, Stomph TJ, Struik PC (2014) Can exploiting natural genetic variation in leaf photo- 
    synthesis contribute to increasing rice productivity? A simulation analysis. Plant Cell Environ  
    37:22–34 
Haake V, Zrenner R, Sonnewald U, Stitt M (1998) A moderate decrease of plastid aldolase activ- 
    ity inhibits photosynthesis, alters the levels of sugars and starch, and inhibits growth of potato  
    plants. Plant J 14:147–157 
Haake V, Geiger M, Walch-Liu P, Engels C, Zrenner R, Stitt M (1999) Changes in aldolase activ- 
    ity in wild-type potato plants are important for acclimation to growth irradiance and carbon  
    dioxide concentration, because plastid aldolase exerts control over the ambient rate of photo- 
    synthesis across a range of growth conditions. Plant J 17:479–489 
Hajirezaei M-R, Peisker M, Tschiersch H, Palatnik JF, Valle EM, Carrillo N, Sonnewald U (2002)  
    Small  changes  in  the  activity  of  chloroplastic  NADP+-dependent  ferredoxin  oxidoreductase  

    lead to impaired plant growth and restrict photosynthetic activity of transgenic tobacco plants.  
    Plant J 29:281–293 
Hammond ET, Andrews TJ, Mott KA, Woodrow IE (1998) Regulation of Rubisco activation in  
    antisense plants of tobacco containing reduced levels of Rubisco activase. Plant J 14:101–110 
Hanba YT, Shibasaka M, Hayashi Y, Hayakawa T, Kasamo K, Terashima I, Katsuhara M (2004)  
    Overexpression of the barley aquaporin HvPIP2;1 increases internal CO2 conductance and CO  2 
    assimilation in the leaves of transgenic rice plants. Plant Cell Physiol 45:521–529 

----------------------- Page 66-----------------------

Strategies for Engineering Photosynthesis for Enhanced Plant Biomass Production                        53 

Harrison  EP,  Willingham  NM,  Lloyd  JC,  Raines  CA  (1998)  Reduced  sedoheptulose-1,7-  
    bisphosphatase  levels  in  transgenic  tobacco  lead  to  decreased  photosynthetic  capacity  and  
    altered carbohydrate accumulation. Planta 204:27–36 
Harrison EP, Olcer H, Lloyd JC, Long SP, Raines CA (2001) Small decreases in SBPase cause a  
    linear decline in the apparent RuBP regeneration rate, but do not affect Rubisco carboxylation  
    capacity. J Exp Bot 52:1779–1784 
Hatano-Iwasaki A, Ogawa K (2012) Biomass production is promoted by increasing an aldolase  
    undergoing glutathionylation in Arabidopsis thaliana . Int J Dev Biol 6:1–8 
Hay WT, Bihmidine S, Mutlu N, Le Hoang K, Awada T, Weeks DP, Clemente TE, Long SP (2017)  
    Enhancing soybean photosynthetic CO2 assimilation using a cyanobacterial membrane protein,  
    ictB. J Plant Physiol 212:58–68 
Heckwolf  M,  Pater  D,  Hanson  DT,  Kaldenhoff  R  (2011)  The Arabidopsis  thaliana  aquaporin  
    AtPIP1;2 is a physiologically relevant CO2 transport facilitator. Plant J 67:795–804 
Herdean A, Teardo E, Nilsson AK, Pfeil BE, Johansson ON, Ünnep R, Nagy G, Zsiros O, Dana S,  
    Solymosi K, Garab G (2016) A voltage-dependent chloride channel fine-tunes photosynthesis  
    in plants. Nat Commun 7:11654 
Hisabori T, Sunamura E, Kim Y, Konno H (2013) The chloroplast ATP synthase features the char- 
    acteristic redox regulation machinery. Antioxid Redox Signal 19:1846–1854 
IPCC (2013) Annex II: climate system scenario tables. In: Prather M, Flato G, Friedlingstein P  
    et al (eds) Climate change 2013: the physical science basis. Contribution of Working Group I  
    to the fifth assessment report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. Cambridge  
    University Press, Cambridge 
Ishikawa C, Hatanaka T, Misoo S, Miyake C, Fukayama H (2011) Functional incorporation of  
    sorghum  small  subunit  increases  the  catalytic  turnover  rate  of  RuBisCO  in  transgenic  rice.  
    Plant Physiol 156:1603–1611 
Kaiser E, Morales A, Harbinson J, Heuvelink E, Prinzenberg AE, Marcelis LFM (2016) Metabolic  
    and diffusional limitations of photosynthesis in fluctuating irradiance in Arabidopsis thaliana .  
    Sci Rep 6:31252 
Kaldenhoff  R  (2012)  Mechanisms  underlying  CO2  diffusion  in  leaves.  Curr  Opin  Plant  Biol  
    15:276–281 
Kawai S, Murata K (2008) Structure and function of NAD kinase and NADP phosphatase: key  
    enzymes that regulate the intracellular balance of NAD(H) and NADP(H). Biosci Biotechnol  
    Biochem 72:919–930 
Kebeish R, Niessen M, Thiruveedhi K, Bari R, Hirsch HJ, Rosenkranz R, Stäbler N, Schönfeld B,  
    Kreuzaler F, Peterhänsel C (2007) Chloroplastic photorespiratory bypass increases photosyn- 
    thesis and biomass production in Arabidopsis thaliana . Nat Biotechnol 25:593–599 
Kimura  H,  Hashimoto-Sugimoto  M,  Iba  K, Terashima  I, Yamori W  (2020)  Improved  stomatal  
    opening enhances photosynthetic rate and biomass production in fluctuating light. J Exp Bot  
    71:2339–2350 
Köhler IH, Ruiz-Vera UM, VanLoocke A, Thomey ML, Clemente T, Long SP, Ort DR, Bernacchi  
    CJ  (2016)  Expression  of  cyanobacterial  FBP/SBPase  in  soybean  prevents  yield  depression  
    under future climate conditions. J Exp Bot 68:715–726 
Kossmann  J,  Sonnewald  U,  Willmitzer  L  (1994)  Reduction  of  the  chloroplastic  fructose- 1,6-  
    bisphosphatase in transgenic potato plants impairs photosynthesis and plant growth. Plant J  
    6:637–650 
Kozaki  A,  Takeba  G  (1996)  Photorespiration  protects  C3  plants  from  photooxidation.  
    Nature 384:557 
Kramer DM, Cruz JA, Kanazawa A (2003) Balancing the central roles of the thylakoid proton  
    gradient. Trends Plant Sci 8:27–32 
Kromdijk J, Głowacka K, Leonelli L, Gabilly ST, Iwai M, Niyogi KK, Long SP (2016) Improving  
    photosynthesis and crop productivity by accelerating recovery from photoprotection. Science  
    354:857–861 
Kumar A,  Li  C,  Portis AR  Jr  (2009) Arabidopsis  thaliana  expressing  a  thermostable  chimeric  
    Rubisco activase exhibits enhanced growth and higher rates of photosynthesis at moderately  
    high temperatures. Photosynth Res 100:143–153 

----------------------- Page 67-----------------------

54                                                                                        W. Yamori 

Kunz  HH,  Gierth  M,  Herdean A,  Satoh-Cruz  M,  Kramer  DM,  Spetea  C,  Schroeder  JI  (2014)  
    Plastidial transporters KEA1, -2, and -3 are essential for chloroplast osmoregulation, integrity,  
    and pH regulation in Arabidopsis . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 111:7480–7485 
Kurek I, Chang TK, Bertain SM, Madrigal A, Liu L, Lassner MW, Zhu G (2007) Enhanced ther- 
    mostability of Arabidopsis rubisco activase improves photosynthesis and growth rates under  
    moderate heat stress. Plant Cell 19:3230–3241 
Kusumi K, Hirotsuka S, Kumamaru T, Iba K (2012) Increased leaf photosynthesis caused by ele- 
    vated stomatal conductance in a rice mutant deficient in SLAC1, a guard cell anion channel  
    protein. J Exp Bot 63:5635–5644 
Lawson T, Blatt MR (2014) Stomatal size, speed, and responsiveness impact on photosynthesis  
    and water use efficiency. Plant Physiol 164:1556–1570 
Lawson T, Bryant B, Lefebvre S, Lloyd JC, Raines CA (2006) Decreased SBPase activity alters  
    growth and development in transgenic tobacco plants. Plant Cell Environ 29:48–58 
Lefebvre  S,  Lawson  T,  Zakhleniuk  OV,  Lloyd  JC,  Raines  CA,  Fryer  M  (2005)  Increased  
    sedoheptulose- 1,7-bisphosphatase activity in transgenic tobacco plants stimulates photosyn- 
    thesis and growth from an early stage in development. Plant Physiol 138:451–460 
Lieman-Hurwitz J, Rachmilevitch S, Mittler R, Marcus Y, Kaplan A (2003) Enhanced photosyn- 
    thesis and growth of transgenic plants that express ictB, a gene involved in HCO3− accumula- 

    tion in cyanobacteria. Plant Biotechnol J 1:43–50 
Lin MT, Occhialini A, Andralojc PJ, Parry MAJ, Hanson MR (2014) A faster Rubisco with poten- 
    tial to increase photosynthesis in crops. Nature 513:547–550 
Long BM, Hee WY, Sharwood RE, Rae BD, Kaines S, Lim YL, Nguyen ND, Massey B, Bala S,  
    von Caemmerer S, Badger MR (2018) Carboxysome encapsulation of the CO2-fixing enzyme  
    Rubisco in tobacco chloroplasts. Nat Commun 9:3570 
Lopez-Calcagno PE, Fisk S, Brown KL, Bull SE, South PF, Raines CA (2018) Overexpressing  
    the H-protein of the glycine cleavage system increases biomass yield in glasshouse and field  
    grown transgenic tobacco plants. Plant Biotechnol J 17(1):141–151. https://doi.org/10.1111/ 
    pbi.12953 
Maier A, Fahnenstich H, von Caemmerer S, Engqvist MKM, Weber APM, Fluegge U-I, Maurino  
    VG (2012) Transgenic introduction of a glycolate oxidative cycle into A. thaliana chloroplasts  
    leads to growth improvement. Front. Plant Sci 3:38 
Makino A, Sato T, Nakano H, Mae T (1997) Leaf photosynthesis, plant growth and nitrogen allo- 
    cation in rice under different irradiances. Planta 203:390–398 
Masumoto C, Fukayama H, Hatanaka T, Uchida N (2012) Photosynthetic characteristics of anti- 
    sense transgenic rice expressing reduced levels of Rubisco activase. Plant Prod Sci 15:174–182 
Miginiac-Maslow  M,  Johansson  K,  Ruelland  E,  Issakidis-Bourguet  E,  Schepens  I,  Goyer  A,  
    Lemaire‐Chamley M, Jacquot J‐P, Le Maréchal P, Decottignies P (2000) Light-activation of  
    NADP-malate dehydrogenase: a highly controlled process for an optimized function. Physiol  
    Plant 110:322–329 
Miyagawa Y,  Tamoi  M,  Shigeoka  S  (2001)  Overexpression  of  a  cyanobacterial  fructose-1,6-/ 
    sedoheptulose- 1,7-bisphosphatase   in   tobacco   enhances   photosynthesis   and   growth.   Nat  
    Biotechnol 19:965–969 
Miyashita H, Ikemoto H, Kurano N, Adachi K, Chihara M, Miyachi S (1996) Chlorophyll d as a  
    major pigment. Nature 383:402–402 
Morris PF, Layzell DB, Canvin DT (1988) Ammonia production and assimilation in glutamate  
    synthase mutants of Arabidopsis thaliana . Plant Physiol 87:148–154 
Mott KA, Snyder GW, Woodrow IE (1997) Kinetics of Rubisco activation as determined from gas-  
    exchange measurements in antisense plants of Arabidopsis thaliana containing reduced levels  
    of Rubisco activase. Aust J Plant Physiol 24:811–818 
Mueller-Cajar O, Stotz M, Wendler P, Hartl FU, Bracher A, Hayer-Hartl M (2011) Structure and  
    function of the AAA+ protein CbbX, a red-type Rubisco activase. Nature 479:194–199 
Murchie EH, Niyogi KK (2011) Manipulation of photoprotection to improve plant photosynthesis.  
    Plant Physiol 155:86–92 

----------------------- Page 68-----------------------

Strategies for Engineering Photosynthesis for Enhanced Plant Biomass Production                       55 

Naumburg E, Ellsworth DS (2002) Short-term light and leaf photosynthetic dynamics affect esti- 
    mates of daily understory photosynthesis in four tree species. Tree Physiol 22:393–401 
Nikkanen L, Toivola J, Rintamäki E (2016) Crosstalk between chloroplast thioredoxin systems in  
    regulation of photosynthesis. Plant Cell Environ 39:1691–1705 
Ölcer H, Lloyd JC, Raines CA (2001) Photosynthetic capacity is differentially affected by reduc- 
    tions  in  sedoheptulose-1,7-bisphosphatase  activity  during  leaf  development  in  transgenic  
    tobacco plants. Plant Physiol 125:982–989 
Papanatsiou  M,  Petersen  J,  Henderson  L, Wang Y,  Christie  JM,  Blatt  MR  (2019)  Optogenetic  
    manipulation  of  stomatal  kinetics  improves  carbon  assimilation,  water  use,  and  growth.  
    Science 363:1456–1459 
Parry MAJ, Keys AJ, Madgwick PJ, Carmo-Silva AE, Andralojc PJ (2008) Rubisco regulation: a  
    role for inhibitors. J Exp Bot 59:1569–1580 
Pearcy RW (1990) Sunflecks and photosynthesis in plant canopies. Annu Rev Plant Physiol Plant  
    Mol Biol 41:421–453 
Pesaresi P, Scharfenberg M, Weigel M, Granlund I, Schroder WP, Finazzi G, Rappaport F, Masiero  
    S, Furini A, Jahns P, Leister D (2009) Mutants, overexpressors, and interactors of Arabidopsis  
    plastocyanin isoforms: revised roles of plastocyanin in photosynthetic electron flow and thyla- 
    koid redox state. Mol Plant 2:236–248 
Peterhansel C, Blume C, Offermann S (2013) Photorespiratory bypasses: how can they work? J  
    Exp Bot 64:709–715 
Portis AR Jr (2003) Rubisco activase: Rubisco’s catalytic chaperone. Photosynth Res 75:11–27 
Pribil M, Pesaresi P, Hertle A, Barbato R, Leister D (2010) Role of plastid protein phosphatase  
    TAP38 in LHCII dephosphorylation and thylakoid electron flow. PLoS Biol 8:e1000288 
Price GD, von Caemmerer S, Evans JR, Siebke K, Anderson JM, Badger MR (1998) Photosynthesis  
    is strongly reduced by antisense suppression of chloroplastic cytochrome bf complex in trans- 
    genic tobacco. Funct Plant Biol 25:445–452 
Price GD, Badger MR, von Caemmerer S (2011) The prospect of using cyanobacterial bicarbonate  
    transporters to improve leaf photosynthesis in C3 crop plants. Plant Physiol 155:20–26 
Price GD, Pengelly JJL, Forster B, Du J, Whitney SM, von Caemmerer S, Badger MR, Howitt SM,  
    Evans JR (2013) The cyanobacterial CCM as a source of genes for improving photosynthetic  
    CO2 fixation in crop species. J Exp Bot 64:753–768 
Raines CA (2003) The Calvin cycle revisited. Photosynth Res 75:1–10 
Raines CA, Paul MJ (2006) Products of leaf primary carbon metabolism modulate the develop- 
    mental programme determining plant morphology. J Exp Bot 57:1857–1862 
Raines  CA,  Lloyd  JC,  Dyer  TA  (1999)  New  insights  into  the  structure  and  function  of  
    sedoheptulose- 1,7-bisphosphatase;  an  important  but  neglected  Calvin  cycle  enzyme.  J  Exp  
    Bot 50:1–8 
Richards RA (2000) Selectable traits to increase crop photosynthesis and yield of grain crops. J  
    Exp Bot 51:447–458 
Rodriguez  RE,  Lodeyro A,  Poli  HO,  Zurbriggen  M,  Palatnik  JF,  Tognetti  VB,  Tschiersch  H,  
    Hajirezaei MR, Valle EM, Carrillo N (2007) Transgenic tobacco plants overexpressing chlo- 
    roplastic ferredoxin-NADP(H) reductase display normal rates of photosynthesis and increased  
    tolerance to oxidative stress. Plant Physiol 143:639–649 
Rojas-González JA, Soto-Súarez M, García-Díaz Á, Romero-Puertas MC, Sandalio LM, Mérida  
    Á, Thormählen  I  et  al  (2015)  Disruption  of  both  chloroplastic  and  cytosolic  FBPase  genes  
    results in a dwarf phenotype and important starch and metabolite changes in Arabidopsis thali - 
    ana. J Exp Bot 66:2673–2689 
Rosenthal D, Locke A, Khozaei M, Raines C, Long S, Ort D (2011) Over-expressing the C3 pho- 
    tosynthesis cycle enzyme sedoheptulose-1-7 bisphosphatase improves photosynthetic carbon  
    gain and yield under fully open air CO2 fumigation (FACE). BMC Plant Biol 11:123 
Sage RF, Sage TL, Kocacinar F (2012) Photorespiration and the evolution of C  photosynthesis. 4 
    Annu Rev Plant Biol 63:19–47 

----------------------- Page 69-----------------------

56                                                                                                 W. Yamori 

Sakoda  K, Yamori W,  Groszmann  M,  Evans  JR  (2021)  Stomatal,  mesophyll  conductance,  and  
    biochemical limitations to photosynthesis during induction. Plant Physiology 
Sahrawy M, Avila C, Chueca A, Canovas FM, Lopez-Gorge J (2004) Increased sucrose level and  
    altered  nitrogen  metabolism  in Arabidopsis  thaliana  transgenic  plants  expressing  antisense  
    chloroplastic fructose-1,6-bisphosphatase. J Exp Bot 55:2495–2503 
Salvucci ME, Crafts-Brandner SJ (2004a) Relationship between the heat tolerance of photosyn- 
    thesis and the thermal stability of Rubisco activase in plants from contrasting thermal environ- 
    ments. Plant Physiol 134:1460–1470 
Salvucci ME, Crafts-Brandner SJ (2004b) Inhibition of photosynthesis by heat stress: the activa- 
    tion state of Rubisco as a limiting factor in photosynthesis. Physiol Plant 120:179–186 
Salvucci ME, DeRidder BP, Portis AR (2006) Effect of activase level and isoform on the thermo- 
    tolerance of photosynthesis in Arabidopsis . J Exp Bot 57:3793–3799 
Sanz-Barrio R, Corral-Martinez P, Ancin M, Segui-Simarro JM, Farran I (2013) Overexpression  
    of  plastidial  thioredoxin  f  leads  to  enhanced  starch  accumulation  in  tobacco  leaves.  Plant  
    Biotechnol J 11:618–627 
Scafaro AP, Atwell BJ, Muylaert S, Van Reusel B, Alguacil Ruiz G, Van Rie J, Gallé A (2018) A  
    thermotolerant variant of Rubisco activase from a wild relative improves growth and seed yield  
    in rice under heat stress. Front Plant Sci 9:1663 
Schöttler MA, Kirchhoff H, Weis E (2004) The role of plastocyanin in the adjustment of the photo- 
    synthetic electron transport to the carbon metabolism in tobacco. Plant Physiol 136:4265–4274 
Shimadzu S, Seo M, Terashima I, Yamori W (2019) Whole irradiated plant leaves showed faster  
    photosynthetic induction than individually irradiated leaves via improved stomatal opening.  
    Front Plant Sci 10:1512 
Simkin AJ, McAusland L, Lawson T, Raines CA (2017) Over-expression of the Rieske FeS protein  
    increases electron transport rates and biomass yield. Plant Physiol 175:134–145 
Sinclair TR, Purcell LC, Sneller CH (2004) Crop transformation and the challenge to increase  
    yield potential. Trends Plant Sci 9:70–75 
Spreitzer RJ, Salvucci ME (2002) Rubisco: structure, regulatory interactions, and possibilities for  
    a better enzyme. Annu Rev Plant Biol 53:449–475 
Stotz M, Mueller-Cajar O, Ciniawsky S, Wendler P, Hartl FU, Bracher A, Hayer-Hartl M (2011)  
    Structure of green-type RuBisCO activase from tobacco. Nat Struct Mol Biol 18:1366–1370 
Takahara K, Kasajima I, Takahashi H, Hashida SN, Itami T, Onodera H, Toki S, Yanagisawa S,  
    Kawai-Yamada M, Uchimiya H (2010) Metabolome and photochemical analysis of rice plants  
    overexpressing Arabidopsis NAD kinase gene. Plant Physiol 152:1863–1873 
Tamoi M, Nagaoka M, Miyagawa Y, Shigeoka S (2006) Contribution of fructose-l,6-bisphosphatase   
    and sedoheptulose-l,7-bisphosphatase to the photosynthetic rate and carbon flow in the Calvin  
    cycle in transgenic plants. Plant Cell Physiol 47:380–390 
Tanaka Y, Sugano SS, Shimada T, Hara-Nishimura I (2013) Enhancement of leaf photosynthetic  
    capacity through increased stomatal density in Arabidopsis . New Phytol 198:757–764 
Tanaka Y, Adachi S, Yamori W (2019) Natural genetic variation of the photosynthetic induction  
    response to fluctuating light environment. Curr Opin Plant Biol 49:52–59 
Taylor SH, Long SP (2017) Slow induction of photosynthesis on shade to sun transitions in wheat  
    may cost at least 21% of productivity. Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci 372:20160543 
Tazoe Y, von Caemmerer S, Estavillo GM, Evans JR (2011) Using tunable diode laser spectros- 
    copy to measure carbon isotope discrimination and mesophyll conductance to CO2 diffusion  
    dynamically at different CO  concentrations. Plant Cell Environ 344:580–5912 
Terashima I, Hanba YT, Tholen D, Niinemets Ü (2011) Leaf functional anatomy in relation to  
    photosynthesis. Plant Physiol 155:108–116 
Tholen D, Zhu XG (2011) The mechanistic basis of internal conductance: a theoretical analysis of  
    mesophyll cell photosynthesis and CO2 diffusion. Plant Physiol 156:90–105 
Tholen D, Boom C, Noguchi K, Ueda S, Katase T, Terashima I (2008) The chloroplast avoidance  
    response decreases internal conductance to CO2 diffusion in Arabidopsis thaliana leaves. Plant  
    Cell Environ 31:1688–1700 

----------------------- Page 70-----------------------

Strategies for Engineering Photosynthesis for Enhanced Plant Biomass Production                       57 

Thormählen I, Ruber J, von Roepenack-Lahaye E, Ehrlich S, Massot V, Huemmer C, Tezycka J,  
    Issakidis-Bourguet E, Geigenberger P (2013) Inactivation of thioredoxin f1 leads to decreased  
    light  activation  of  ADP-glucose  pyrophosphorylase  and  altered  diurnal  starch  turnover  in  
    leaves of Arabidopsis plants. Plant Cell Environ 36:16–29 
Thormählen  I,  Zupok A,  Rescher  J,  Leger  J, Weissenberger  S,  Groysman  J,  Orwat A,  Chatel-  
    Innocenti G, Issakidis-Bourguet E, Armbruster U et al (2017) Thioredoxins play a crucial role  
    in dynamic acclimation of photosynthesis in fluctuating light. Mol Plant 10:168–182 
Tikkanen M, Grieco M, Nurmi M, Rantala M, Suorsa M, Aro EM (2012) Regulation of the pho- 
    tosynthetic  apparatus  under  fluctuating  growth  light.  Philos  Trans  R  Soc  Lond  B  Biol  Sci  
    367:3486–3493 
Tilman D, Balzer C, Hill J, Befort BL (2011) Global food demand and the sustainable intensifica- 
    tion of agriculture. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 108:20260–20264 
Timm S, Florian A, Arrivault S, Stitt M, Fernie AR, Bauwe H (2012) Glycine decarboxylase con- 
    trols photosynthesis and plant growth. FEBS Lett 586:3692–3697 
Timm S, Wittmiss M, Gamlien S, Ewald R, Florian A, Frank M, Wirtz M et al (2015) Mitochondrial  
    dihydrolipoyl    dehydrogenase     activity  shapes   photosynthesis    and   photorespiration    of  
    Arabidopsis thaliana . Plant Cell 27:1968–1984 
Timm S, Florian A, Fernie AR, Bauwe H (2016) The regulatory interplay between photorespira- 
    tion and photosynthesis. J Exp Bot 67:2923–2929 
Toivola J, Nikkanen L, Dahlström KM, Salminen TA, Lepistö A, Vignols F, Rintamäki E (2013)  
    Overexpression  of  chloroplast  NADPH-dependent  thioredoxin  reductase  in  Arabidopsis  
    enhances leaf growth and elucidates in vivo function of reductase and thioredoxin domains.  
    Front Plant Sci 4:389 
Uehlein  N,  Sperling  H,  Heckwolf  M,  Kaldenhoff  R  (2012) The Arabidopsis  aquaporin  PIP1;2  
    rules cellular CO2 uptake. Plant Cell Environ 35:1077–1083 
Uematsu K, Suzuki N, Iwamae T, Inui M, Yukawa H (2012) Increased fructose 1,6- bisphosphate  
    aldolase  in  plastids  enhances  growth  and  photosynthesis  of  tobacco  plants.  J  Exp  Bot  
    63:3001–3009 
Vialet-Chabrand SRM, Matthews JSA, McAusland L, Blatt MR, Griffiths H, Lawson T (2017)  
    Temporal dynamics of stomatal behavior: modeling and implications for photosynthesis and  
    water use. Plant Physiol 174:603–613 
von Caemmerer S, Quick WP, Furbank RT (2012) The development of C4 rice: current progress  
    and future challenges. Science 336:1671–1672 
Wada S, Yamamoto H, Suzuki Y, Yamori W, Shikanai T, Makino A (2018) Flavodiiron protein  
    substitutes for cyclic electron flow without competing CO2 assimilation in rice. Plant Physiol  
    176:1509–1518 
Walker BJ, VanLoocke A, Bernacchi CJ, Ort DR (2016) The costs of photorespiration to food  
    production now and in the future. Annu Rev Plant Biol 67:107–129 
Whitney SM, Sharwood RE, Orr D, White SJ, Alonso H, Galmés J (2011) Isoleucine 309 acts as  
    a C4 catalytic switch that increases ribulose-1,5-bisphosphate carboxylase/oxygenase (rubisco)  
    carboxylation rate in Flaveria. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 108:14688–14693 
Wigge B, Krömer S, Gardeström P (1993) The redox levels and subcellular distribution of pyridine  
    nucleotides in illuminated barley leaf protoplasts studied by rapid fractionation. Physiol Plant  
    88:10–18 
Wright IJ, Reich PB, Westoby M, Ackerly DD, Baruch Z et al (2004) The worldwide leaf econom- 
    ics spectrum. Nature 428:821–827 
Yamamoto H, Kato H, Shinzaki Y, Horiguchi S, Shikanai T, Hase T, Endo T, Nishioka M, Makino  
    A, Tomizawa K, Miyake C (2006) Ferredoxin limits cyclic electron flow around PSI (CEF-  
    PSI) in higher plants: stimulation of CEF-PSI enhances non-photochemical quenching of Chl  
    fluorescence in transplastomic tobacco. Plant Cell Physiol 47:1355–1371 
Yamamoto H, Takahashi S, Badger MR, Shikanai T (2016) Artificial remodelling of alternative  
    electron flow by flavodiiron proteins in Arabidopsis . Nat Plants 2:16012 

----------------------- Page 71-----------------------

58                                                                                         W. Yamori 

Yamori W (2016) Photosynthetic response to fluctuating environments and photoprotective strate- 
    gies under abiotic stress. J Plant Res 129:379–395 
Yamori W, Shikanai T (2016) Physiological functions of cyclic electron transport around photosys- 
    tem I in sustaining photosynthesis and plant growth. Annu Rev Plant Biol 67:81–106 
Yamori W, von Caemmerer S (2009) Effect of Rubisco activase deficiency on the temperature  
    response  of  CO2  assimilation  rate  and  Rubisco  activation  state:  insights  from  transgenic  
    tobacco with reduced amounts of Rubisco activase. Plant Physiol 151:2073–2082 
Yamori W, Noguchi K, Hanba YT, Terashima I (2006a) Effects of internal conductance on the  
    temperature dependence of the photosynthetic rate in spinach leaves from contrasting growth  
    temperatures. Plant Cell Physiol 47:1069–1080 
Yamori W, Suzuki K, Noguchi K, Nakai M, Terashima I (2006b) Effects of Rubisco kinetics and  
    Rubisco activation state on the temperature dependence of the photosynthetic rate in spinach  
    leaves from contrasting growth temperatures. Plant Cell Environ 29:1659–1670 
Yamori W, Takahashi S, Makino A, Price GD, Badger MR, von Caemmerer S (2011) The roles of  
    ATP synthase and the cytochrome b6/f complexes in limiting chloroplast electron transport and  
    determining photosynthetic capacity. Plant Physiol 155:956–962 
Yamori W, Masumoto C, Fukayama H, Makino A (2012) Rubisco activase is a key regulator of  
    non-steady-state photosynthesis at any leaf temperature and, to a lesser extent, of steady-state  
    photosynthesis at high temperature. Plant J 71:871–880 
Yamori W, Hikosaka K, Way DA (2014) Temperature response of photosynthesis in C3, C  and CAM 4 
    plants: temperature acclimation and temperature adaptation. Photosynth Res 119:101–117 
Yamori W, Kondo E, Sugiura D, Terashima I, Suzuki Y, Makino A (2016a) Enhanced leaf photo- 
    synthesis as a target to increase grain yield: insights from transgenic rice lines with variable  
    Rieske FeS protein content in the cytochrome b6/f complex. Plant Cell Environ 39:80–87 
Yamori W, Irving LJ, Adachi S, Busch FA (2016b) Strategies for optimizing photosynthesis with  
    biotechnology to improve crop yield. In: Pessarakli M (ed) Handbook of photosynthesis, 3rd  
    edn. Taylor & Francis, Boca Raton, pp 741–759 
Yamori W, Makino A, Shikanai T (2016c) A physiological role of cyclic electron transport around  
    photosystem I in sustaining photosynthesis under fluctuating light in rice. Sci Rep 6:20147 
Yamori W, Kusumi K, Iba K, Terashima I (2020) Increased stomatal conductance induces rapid  
    changes to photosynthetic rate in response to naturally fluctuating light conditions in rice. Plant  
    Cell Environ 43:1230–1240 

Open Access    This chapter is licensed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution 4.0  
International License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/), which permits use, sharing,  
adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give appropriate  
credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons license and  
indicate if changes were made. 
    The images or other third party material in this chapter are included in the chapter's Creative  
Commons license, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not  
included in the chapter's Creative Commons license and your intended use is not permitted by  
statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from  
the copyright holder. 

----------------------- Page 72-----------------------

Green Super Rice (GSR) Traits: Breeding  
and Genetics for Multiple Biotic  
and Abiotic Stress Tolerance in Rice 

Jauhar Ali, Mahender Anumalla, Varunseelan Murugaiyan, and Zhikang Li 

Abstract  The frequent fluctuations in global climate variability (GCV), decreases in  
farmland and irrigation water, soil degradation and erosion, and increasing fertilizer  
costs are the significant factors in declining rice productivity, mainly in Asia and Africa.  
Under GCV scenarios, it is a challenging task to meet the rice food demand of the grow- 
ing population. Identifying green traits (tolerance of biotic and abiotic stresses, nutrient- 
use efficiency, and nutritional grain quality) and stacking them in high-yielding elite  
genetic backgrounds is one promising approach to increase rice productivity. To this  
end, the Green Super Rice (GSR) breeding strategy helps to pool multi-stress-tolerance  
traits by stringent selection processes and to develop superior GSR cultivars within a  
short span of 4–5 years. In the crossing and selection process of GSR breeding, selective  
introgression lines (SILs) derived from sets of early backcross BC F  bulk populations 1 2 
through both target traits and non- target traits were selected. Genotyping of SILs with  
high-density SNP markers leads to the identification of a large number of SNP markers  
linked with the target green traits. The identified SILs with superior trait combinations  
were used for designed QTL pyramiding to combine different target green traits. The  
GSR  breeding  strategy  also  focused  on  nutrient-  and  water-use  efficiency  besides  
environment- friendly green features primarily to increase grain yield and income returns  
for resource-poor farmers. In this chapter, we have highlighted the GSR breeding strat- 
egy and QTL introgression of green traits in rice. This breeding strategy has successfully  
dissected many complex traits and also released several multi-stress-tolerant varieties  
with high grain yield and productivity in the target regions of Asia and Africa. 

J. Ali (*) · M. Anumalla  
Rice Breeding Platform, International Rice Research Institute (IRRI),   
Los Baños, Laguna, Philippines 
e-mail: J.Ali@irri.org  

V. Murugaiyan  
Rice Breeding Platform, International Rice Research Institute (IRRI),   
Los Baños, Laguna, Philippines  

Plant Nutrition, Institute of Crop Sciences and Resource Conservation (INRES), University  
of Bonn, Bonn, Germany  

Z. Li  
National Key Facility for Crop Gene Resources and Genetic Improvement, Institute of Crop  
Science, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences (CAAS), Beijing, China 

© The Author(s) 2021                                                                                 59 
J. Ali, S. H. Wani (eds.), Rice Improvement,  
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-66530-2_3 

----------------------- Page 73-----------------------

60                                                                                         J. Ali et al. 

Keywords  Green traits · Molecular breeding strategies · QTLs and genes ·  
Multiple-stress tolerance · Green super rice varieties 

1      Introduction 

Food security is a global challenge for plant researchers to increase crop productiv- 
ity, especially under changing climatic conditions. Rice (Oryza sativa L.) is one of  
the staple food crops for more than half of the world population. More than 95% of  
global  rice  is  produced  and  consumed  by  the  top  10  rice-producing  countries  
(Fig. 1). China consumes about 143 million metric tons (MMT), followed by India  
(103  MMT),  with  these  being  the  two  most  populated  countries  (https://www. 
statista.com). The rapid growth of population is estimated to reach 9.7 billion by  
2050,  and  this  would  have  a  direct  bearing  on  the  demand  side  of  global  food  
(United Nations 2019). Worldwide, more than 800 million people are affected by  
malnutrition, thus hindering sustainable development programs, and food demand  
is expected to increase by 59–98% by 2050 (Elferink and Schierhorn 2016). Apart  
from  this  great  challenge,  increased  global  climate  variability  (GCV)  (abiotic  
stresses: drought, salinity, low/high temperature, submergence/flooding; and biotic  
stresses: blast, bacterial leaf blight, brown planthopper, etc.) and decreasing natural  
resources (NRS) (e.g., decreased availability of irrigation water, labor scarcity, ara- 
ble land reduction, and soil nutrient deficiency and toxicity) are the foremost factors  
that slow the pace toward food security for the global population. As per the predic- 
tion of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC), Earth’s global sur- 
face temperature is expected to surge by 1.4–5.8 °C by 2100 (Fahad et al. 2019),  

Fig. 1   Estimated growth of population in the top 10 rice-producing countries 

----------------------- Page 74-----------------------

Green Super Rice (GSR) Traits: Breeding and Genetics for Multiple Biotic and Abiotic…       61 

thereby resulting in a decrease in precipitation in the subtropics and a possible rise  
in the frequent occurrences of extreme climatic events. However, these two major  
factors, GCV and NRS, would have direct or indirect effects on crop growth and  
significantly decrease crop yield (Pandey et al. 2017). Accordingly, more than 90%  
of arable lands are prone to one or more than two combinations of stresses, which  
cause up to 70% yield losses in the major food crops (Ray et al. 2015; Fahad et al.  
2017; Tigchelaar et al. 2018). To provide nutrition and food security by 2050, it has  
been projected that crop yield must be increased by 1%, 0.9%, and 1.6% annually  
for rice, wheat, and maize, respectively (Fischer and Edmeades 2010). Thus, current  
grain yield levels are insufficient to sustain the rapid growth of the human popula- 
tion. The production of the principal crops (rice, maize, and wheat) has to increase  
by ~42%, ~67%, and ~38%, respectively, by 2050 to meet this demand (Ray et al.  
2013). As compared to cereals, rice is the only major staple food crop to have more  
nutritional and health benefits for increasing rice consumption; it also has sensitiv- 
ity to the major biotic and abiotic stress factors. Therefore, to overcome the chal- 
lenges  of  growing  GCV  and  decreasing  NRS,  the  development  of  superior  rice  
cultivars with higher grain yield and multiple-stress tolerance is necessary to pro- 
vide a kind of crop insurance besides increasing the income of poor farmers across  
mainly Asian and African countries. 
   Multiple  abiotic  stresses  greatly  influence  crop  productivity  and  have  adverse  
effects on plant growth and development (Fahad et al. 2017; Cohen and Leach 2019).  
For  example,  drought  is  a  major  constraint  in  rice  production  and  approximately  
42 million hectares of rice in Asia suffer significant yield losses from varying amounts  
of drought stress at the different crop growth stages (Saikumar et al. 2016; Sandhu and  
Kumar 2017; Mukamuhirwa et al. 2019). Besides drought, soil salinity and alkalinity  
are also devastating factors that cause significant yield losses of rice crops at the veg- 
etative and reproductive stages. Globally, about 20% of the cultivable land and 33%  
of irrigated agricultural areas are afflicted by salinity stress (Shrivastava and Kumar  
2015). Thus, it is crucial to identify stress-tolerant rice varieties to maintain productiv- 
ity and meet global food security needs. Beyond abiotic stresses, sustainable rice pro- 
duction has become one of the top priorities in developing and adopting eco-friendly  
rice varieties with low input-use efficiency. In the majority of the developed countries,  
farmers  have  been  using  considerably  more  fertilizer  to  increase  their  crop  yield.  
According to Cheng et al. (2007), rice production in China has to be increased by 14%  
by 2030 to meet the food requirements of its rapidly growing population. In Jiangsu  
Province, farmers are applying 300–350 kg N/ha to achieve high yield for rice crops  
(Sui et al. 2013), which is 90% more than the global average N application (Chen  
et al. 2014a) . The excess amounts of nutrient fertilizer also cause the accumulation of  
higher salt concentration in the soil. This further decreases water and nutrient absorp- 
tion,  leading  to  several  changes  in  physiological  processes  as  leaf  dehydration  
decreases photosynthesis efficiency, decreases grain micronutrients, and also causes  
severe environmental pollution (Kreuzwieser and Gessler 2010; Panda et al. 2012;  
Guo et al. 2017; Ali et al. 2018b). Even in China, the excessive amounts of fertilizer  
application in paddy lands to boost yield are no longer a viable option, especially  
under increasing fertilizer costs. This is further driving the search for rice cultivars  

----------------------- Page 75-----------------------

62                                                                                         J. Ali et al. 

with high nutrient-use efficiency that are required for sustainable rice production and  
increasing grain yield under optimal and suboptimal rates of fertilizer dosage. Thus, it  
is essential to develop rice varieties with high nutrient-use efficiency to maximize  
yield and productivity with the best agronomic management options such as judicious  
stage-specific dosages of fertilizer application. Further, it is essential to develop high- 
yielding,  multiple- stress- tolerant  rice  varieties  with  combinations  of  several  green  
traits such as tolerance of/resistance to drought, salinity, high/low temperature, flood- 
ing,  blast,  bacterial  blight,  tungro,  brown  planthopper,  and  stem  borer,  along  with  
water-use efficiency. These multi-stress-tolerant varieties also need to meet market  
segment requirements such as duration, grain shape, and quality preferences. Recently,  
the incorporation of desirable nutrients for improved grain quality such as iron and  
zinc in multi-stress-tolerant cultivars has become necessary in rice improvement pro- 
grams  to  ensure  food  security  and  overcome  hidden  hunger  (Ali  et  al.  2020; Yu  
et al. 2020). 

2      Green Super Rice 

During the past two decades, breeders and biotechnologists have been working on  
various biotic and abiotic stress tolerances with a focus on increasing crop yield.  
This  is  possible  by  modifying  the  plant  architecture  and  introgressing  the  target  
traits into the desired background through conventional and marker-assisted breed- 
ing approaches (Mehta et al. 2019; Oladosu et al. 2019; Gautam et al. 2020; Muthu  
et al. 2020). Complex abiotic stress tolerances such as drought and salinity tolerance  
are polygenic, and may have a negative association with grain yield components and  
might  also  interact  with  genetic  and  physiological  mechanisms  of  similar  traits  
(Guojun et al. 2009). Also, choosing the right donors for different target traits is  
challenging. In most cases, the abiotic stress-tolerant rice varieties are developed by  
crossing with tolerant landraces. However, concern exists regarding the difficulty in  
breaking  undesirable  linkages  through  conventional  breeding  approaches,  which  
often represent a time-consuming process for selecting and fixing desirable lines,  
with limited success (Zhou et al. 2010; Wang et al. 2013). These developed tolerant  
rice varieties are low to moderate yielding under irrigated and rainfed conditions. In  
light of this apprehension, the Green Super Rice (GSR) breeding strategy began in  
2008 at IRRI to efficiently develop lines with multiple-stress tolerance and more  
nutrient- and water-use efficiency with high genetic gains for various targeted eco- 
systems. The development of superior rice varieties with the GSR breeding approach  
under decreased rates of fertilizer, pesticide, and irrigation water, grown in marginal  
environments and producing fewer greenhouse gas emissions, and with improved  
grain nutrient elements (Zhang 2007; Wing et al. 2018), is described in Fig. 2. GSR  
breeding aims to develop stable high-yielding GSR rice varieties with several green  
traits  suitable  to  be  grown  under  lower  input  conditions  in  irrigated  and  rainfed  
areas of Asian and African countries. 

----------------------- Page 76-----------------------

Green Super Rice (GSR) Traits: Breeding and Genetics for Multiple Biotic and Abiotic…                      63 

Fig. 2   A schematic representation of the Green Super Rice (GSR) breeding program for the devel- 
opment  of  green  traits  and  increasing  grain  yield  with  improved  grain  quality.  (a) The  drastic  
changes in climatic variations, degradation of natural resources, and increasing global population  
are the major driving forces for increasing food demand by about 42% by 2050. (b) To ensure food  
security against these challenges, the GSR concept was proposed in 2005, and its major focus was  
to  develop  novel  rice  varieties  with  green  traits,  which  included  tolerance  of  multiple  stresses  
(biotic and abiotic), high nutrient-use efficiency, fewer inputs of fertilizer, and water-saving. The  
combination of green traits and the GSR breeding concept provided an environment-friendly and  
natural resource–saving dimension. (c) The major target of GSR breeding is to develop new GSR  
cultivars through the integration of an advanced genomics platform for determining the genomic  
regions for green traits and further disseminating promising cultivars for specific target regions to  
improve the income of resource-poor farmers. (d) As of now, many QTLs have been identified  
using  the  GSR  breeding  strategy,  and  several  genes  have  been  functionally  characterized  and  
cloned for increasing the tolerance of abiotic stresses (Ali et al. 2020; Yu et al. 2020). These identi- 
fied QTLs and genes provide abundant genetic information for the development of novel GSR  
varieties 

    Integrating advanced genomics and stringent phenotypic selection in the GSR  
breeding strategy helped to identify promising rice varieties besides understanding  
the molecular genetics and physiological mechanisms underlying trait expression  
(Wing et al. 2018; Ali et al. 2020; Yu et al. 2020). This breeding strategy played a  
significant role in the quick introgression of the desired target traits with the highest  
precision and with less or no genetic drag. 

2.1       GSR Breeding and Population Development 

The concept of GSR and its breeding strategy followed a systematic breeding effort  
and  advanced  genotyping  approaches  for  developing  varieties  with  significantly  
improved  tolerance  of  multiple  biotic  and  abiotic  stresses,  along  with  improved  
nutrient- and water-use efficiency. A schematic view of the backcross GSR breeding  
technology for developing early backcross-selective introgression lines (EB-SILs)  

----------------------- Page 77-----------------------

64                                                                                             J. Ali et al. 

appears in Fig. 3. The development of several promising stress-tolerant rice culti- 
vars that withstand drought, salinity, and flooding through a selective introgression  
breeding approach started at IRRI in 1998 (Li et al.  2005; Ali et al. 2006; Lafitte  
et al.  2006). These early efforts helped in the development of the GSR breeding  
strategy to breed varieties with multiple biotic and abiotic stress tolerance. Starting  
in 2009, IRRI focused on developing cultivars with multiple abiotic stress tolerance  

Fig. 3   IRRI-Green Super Rice early backcross breeding strategy to develop rice varieties with  
multiple-stress tolerance, resource-use efficiency, and high yield with market-required grain qual- 
ity. (a) The selected donors were crossed with HHZ and WTR-1 and later selfed to create 16 BC1F  2 
bulk populations. These backcrossed lines were used in three rounds of phenotypic selection under  
different environments and selected lines with better performance were evaluated in the different  
targeted ecosystems. (b) Identified promising trait-specific selective introgression lines with more  
than one target green trait were used for the designed QTL pyramiding to combine various desir- 
able traits into one single line. The blue-colored circles indicated in the schematic diagram were  
used to show the different genotyping technologies used to identify genomic regions associated  
with green traits in GSR breeding populations. (IRG, irrigated conditions; DSF, drought stress in  
field conditions; BDS, biotic-stress phenotypic screening; RFD, rainfed environment; SAL, salinity  
at the seedling stage at 18 d/sm (deciSiemens per metre); COL, cold stress; LIP, low inputs (with- 
out any fertilizer, pesticide, or herbicide); ARG , anaerobic germination (direct-seeded and imme- 
diately submerged in water for 21 days and maintained at 10-cm water depth); SBM, submergence  
for 21 days at 14 days of seedling stage 

----------------------- Page 78-----------------------

Green Super Rice (GSR) Traits: Breeding and Genetics for Multiple Biotic and Abiotic…    65 

through an innovative GSR breeding strategy to benefit poor and smallholder farm- 
ers (Ali et al. 2012). The concept of a GSR breeding program primarily involved  
two fundamental steps: first, developing superior EB-SILs; second, identifying suit- 
able SILs to develop designed QTL pyramiding (DQP) lines. These two approaches  
helped to develop GSR varieties with multiple biotic and abiotic stress tolerance  
without  compromising  on  grain  yield,  grain  appearance,  and  cooking  quality  
parameters. 
   The GSR breeding program at IRRI initially focused on identifying and explor- 
ing genetic variation and further selecting ~500 elite EB-SILs in an elite and widely  
adaptable Chinese variety, Huang-Hua-Zhan (HHZ), background with 16 donors  
from  the  mini-core  collection  of  rice  germplasm  and  a  part  of  the  3000  Rice  
Genomes Project. These parental varieties underwent whole-genome sequencing to  
identify  genomic  variations.  In  the  IRRI  GSR  breeding  program,  two  additional  
elite  recipients,  Weed  Tolerant  Rice-1  (WTR-1)  and  TME80518,  were  used  for  
developing EB-SILs (Ali et al. 2012, 2013b, 2018a). In this GSR breeding program,  
the  BC F   populations  were  derived  from  crosses  between  the  recipients  (HHZ, 1 2 
WTR-1, and TME80518) and the 16 donors at IRRI. The F s derived from the HHZ 1 
background were again backcrossed with HHZ and subsequently selfed, and the  
progenies bulked to generate a total of 16 BC F  bulk populations. These bulk popu-1 2 
lations were screened over three rounds of selection for different abiotic stresses  
(drought, salinity, submergence, and low-input fertilizer) and biotic stresses (blast,  
bacterial leaf blight, and tungro), and in normal irrigated conditions. This led to the  
identification of a total of 1333 trait-specific SILs from the HHZ background, 2232  
SILs from the WTR-1 background, and 1408 SILs from the TME80518 background. 
   The developed SILs were phenotyped across different stress and non-stress con- 
ditions and genotyped with SSR and high-density SNP markers. The phenotypic  
and marker data generated using SSR and SNP analysis allowed us to identify the  
donor QTLs associated with target abiotic and biotic stress tolerance/resistance and  
yield in the SILs. Then, the best SILs were selected as parents based on both their  
superior phenotypes and complementary donor alleles for designed QTL pyramid- 
ing (DQP) to develop better GSR varieties that combine various target traits from  
two  or  more  donors.  These  promising  SILs  showed  high  tolerance  vis-à-vis  the  
respective tolerant checks IR74371-70-1-1, FL478, IR49830, and PSBRc82 under  
normal and stress conditions. Through these DQP approaches, a total of 2023 pyra- 
miding lines (PDLs) from the HHZ background and 661 PDLs from the WTR-1  
background were developed and found superior to the checks for all of the traits  
studied (Ali et al. 2013a, 2020; Li and Ali 2017). The selected 564 EB-SILs derived  
from the genetic background of WTR-1 as recipient parents and 11 donor parents  
were   sequenced   using   tunable   genotyping-by-sequencing   (tGBS)   technology.  
Table  1  provides  the  list  of  donors  and  recipients  used.  These  SILs  developed  
through early backcross breeding were more advantageous in terms of high allelic  
diversity, which comprised multiple donor parents. As compared with the biparental  
mapping  population,  these  SILs  provide  more  precise  QTL  detection  and  fine-  
mapping of candidate genes for biotic and abiotic stress tolerance (Ali et al. 2017,  
2018a). A total of 102 loci were identified from the 11 populations, and they contain  

----------------------- Page 79-----------------------

66                                                                                                J. Ali et al. 

Table 1   List of donors used in the GSR breeding program 

 S.  
 no.   Parent   Rice variety        Origin         Key features 
 1     DP       OM1723              Vietnam        Long panicle, salinity and drought tolerance 
 2     DP       Phalguna            India          Fine-grain type, resistance to blast and gall midge  
                                                   disease 
 3     DP       IR50                Philippines    Resistance to insects and diseases, superior grain  
                                                   quality 
 4     DP       IR64                Philippines    High yield, tolerance of lodging, blast resistance,  
                                                   long slender grain 
 5     DP       Teqing              China          High yield, tolerance of nitrogen deficiency and  
                                                   zinc deficiency 
 6     DP       PSBRc66             Philippines    High amylose content 
 7     DP       CDR22               India          Strong restoring ability and high combining ability,  
                                                   resistance to blast 
 8     DP       PSBRc28             Philippine     High yield, resistance to blast, moderate resistance  
                                                   to brown planthopper, bacterial leaf blight, green  
                                                   leafhopper, and stem borer 
 9     DP       Yue-Xiang-          China          Wide adaptation and high harvest index 
                Zhan 
  10   DP       Khazar              Iran           Tolerance of salinity, zinc deficiency, and anaerobic  
                                                   germination 
  11   DP       OM1706             Vietnam         Tolerance of salinity, anaerobic germination, and  
                                                   submergence, resistance to brown planthopper 
  12   DP       IRAT352             CIAT           Tolerance of low pH and aluminum toxicity 
  13   DP       Zhong 413           China          High yield, wide compatibility, restoring ability 
  14   DP       R644                China          Resistance to brown planthopper 
  15   DP       IR58025B           Philippines     Popular wild-abortive elite maintainer 
  16   DP       Bg304               Sri Lanka      Tolerance of salinity and zinc deficiency, high yield  
                                                   of red rice, resistance to glyphosate and gall midge,  
                                                   blast, and bacterial leaf blight diseases 
  17   RP       Huang-Hua-          China          Chinese indica variety with high yield and wide  
                Zhan                               adaptability, superior grain quality, moderate  
                                                   tolerance of salt and drought stresses, long panicle 
  18   DP       Haoannong           China          Long panicle, tolerance of low-temperature stress 
  19   DP       Cheng-Hui 448       China          Excellent restorer line, salinity tolerance 
  20   DP       Feng-Ai-Zan         China          High yield 
  21   DP       Y-134              China           Tolerance of submergence and anaerobic  
                                                   germination, resistance to brown planthopper 
  22   DP       Zhong 413          China           High yield, wide compatibility, restoring ability 
  23   DP       Khazar             Iran            High yield, blast resistance, moderate resistance to  
                                                   stem borer, mild aroma 
  24   DP       BG 300              Sri Lanka      Drought tolerance, resistance to brown planthopper,  
                                                   gall midge, blast, and bacterial leaf blight 
  25   DP       OM 997             Vietnam         Drought tolerance, resistance to blast 
  26   DP       Basmati-385        Pakistan        Tolerance of zinc deficiency 

                                                                                                 (continued) 

----------------------- Page 80-----------------------

Green Super Rice (GSR) Traits: Breeding and Genetics for Multiple Biotic and Abiotic…                         67 

Table 1   (continued) 

 S.  
 no.    Parent   Rice variety        Origin         Key features 
 27    DP        M 401               United         Premium grain quality, large kernel, tolerance of  
                                     States         low nitrogen, good yield, late maturity 
 28    DP        X 21                Vietnam        High yield, disease resistance 
 29    RP        Weed Tolerant       China          High yield, widely adapted rice variety 
                 Rice-1 

120 deleterious SNPs, with a range of one to four SNPs per loci. These loci can  
substitute the amino acid, and this leads to changes in the functional proteins in  
either positive or negative regulations (Ali et al. 2018a). Interestingly, the donors of  
SILs have a different introgression frequency of alleles in the recipient genomic  
regions  and  are  mainly  attributed  to  the  severe  selection  pressure  under  abiotic  
stress conditions. With the availability of tGBS marker information with the GSR  
breeding  approach,  several  genetic  loci  have  been  identified  through  the  various  
linkage-based  mapping  methods.  This  innovative  approach  assured  the  develop- 
ment of new rice varieties that were tolerant of multiple stresses. 

3      Genetics of Green Traits 

In the GSR breeding program, the critical genetic determinants of various abiotic  
stress tolerances can be identified through QTL mapping approaches. As of now, the  
details of the identified QTLs and breeding materials are listed in Table 2. In many  
instances, advancement in the identification of stress-tolerance genes and QTLs that  
determine the trait has led to insights into the specific physiological and molecular  
mechanisms in response to various biotic and abiotic stresses (Wing et al. 2018; Yu  
et al. 2020). The highlights of the green traits associated with genetic information  
that confers stress tolerance and adaptive strategies provide valuable information  
for crop improvement. 

3.1      Drought Tolerance  

Drought is a complex trait. Understanding its mechanisms in terms of plant-water  
relationship traits, molecular breeding strategies, and dissecting the molecular genet- 
ics of QTLs and deployment in the breeding pipeline are the key steps for the develop- 
ment of drought-tolerant rice varieties. For drought improvement, it is essential to use  
advanced genomics and omics platforms that provide an opportunity for the mining of  
trait-specific allele functions. Identifying and developing drought- tolerant rice culti- 
vars  mainly  depends  on  two  major  factors:  prospecting  for  donors  and  effective  

----------------------- Page 81-----------------------

                                                                                                                                                                                6 
Table 2   List of QTLs and putative candidate genes for green traits in the Green Super Rice breeding program                                                                   8 

                                                                                                            Putative  
                                                              Breeding       Polymorphic      Number        candidate  
 Traits                 Genotyping      Parents (RP/DP)       strategy       SNPs             of QTLs       genes            Chromosomes             Reference 
 Weed-competitive       SNP array       WTR-1/Y-134           EB-SILs        677              43            13               1, 2, 3, 5, 6, 7, 9, 10,   Dimaano et al.  
 ability                                                                                                                     11, and 12              (2020) 
 Arsenic tolerance      SNP array       WTR-1/                EB-SILs        704              9             25               1, 2, 5,6, 8, and 9     Murugaiyan et al.  
                                        Haoannong                                                                                                    (2019) 
 Nutrient-use           tGBS            WTR-1/                EB-SILs        1174              13           90               1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 9, 10,   Mahender et al.  
 efficiency                             Haoannong                                                                            and 12                  (2019) 
                                        WTR-1/                EB-SILs        1110             4             30               4, 5, 6, and 8 
                                        Cheng-Hui 448 
                                        WTR-1/Zhong 413       EB-SILs        834              2             –                1,11 
 Nutrient-use           SNP array       WTR-1/                EB-SILs        704              49            –                1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8,  Jewel et al. (2019) 
 efficiency                             Haoannong                                                                            9, 10, 11, and 12 
 Low-temperature        SNP array       WTR-1/                EB-SILs        704               82           16               1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8,  Najeeb et al.  
 stress (LTS)                           Haoannong                                                                            9, 10, 11, and 12       (2020) 
 tolerance 
 Salt tolerance         tGBS            WTR-1/Khazar          DQP            9244             6             87               1, 2, and 4             Pang et al. (2017b) 
                                        and BG 300/ 
                                        WTR-1 
 Brown planthopper      SNP array       Huang-Huan-           EB-SILs        702               1            71               1                       Balachiranjeevi  
 resistance                             Zhan/Khazar                                                                                                  et al. (2019) 
 Low-nitrogen           KASP and        HHZ/Teqing,           DQP            3162             7             –                1, 2, and 3             Feng et al. (2018) 
                        WGS             CDR22, and  
                                        OM1723 
 Drought tolerance      KASP            HHZ/Teqing,           DQP            3162             9             –                2, 3, 5, 6, 8, and 12   Feng et al. (2018) 
                                                                                                                                                                                J 
                                                                                                                                                                                . 
                                        CDR22, and                                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                                                                                A 
                                                                                                                                                                                l 
                                                                                                                                                                                i 
                                        OM1723 
                                                                                                                                                                                  
                                                                                                                                                                                e 
                                                                                                                                                                                t 
                                                                                                                                                                                  
SNP array single nucleotide polymorphism array, WGA whole-genome sequence, DQP designed QTL pyramiding, EB-SILs early backcross-derived selective                               a 
                                                                                                                                                                                l 
introgression lines, KASP competitive allele-specific PCR                                                                                                                       . 

----------------------- Page 82-----------------------

Green Super Rice (GSR) Traits: Breeding and Genetics for Multiple Biotic and Abiotic…              69 

phenotypic evaluation methods required for crossing programs and a successful selec- 
tion scheme. However, improving drought tolerance in rice varieties has had slow  
progress due to the complexity of the trait and some associated undesirable character- 
istics, including low grain yield and a lack of preferable nutritional grain quality traits  
(Swamy and Kumar 2013; Kumar et al. 2014). With pre-breeding activity and marker- 
assisted breeding approaches, several drought-tolerant lines have been developed and  
further used in breeding programs for improving lines with multiple-stress tolerance  
(Singh et al. 2016; Ali et al. 2017; Pang et al. 2017a; Gautam et al. 2020; Kumar et al.  
2020). However, improving yield potential under drought environments is limited due  
to the intensity, duration, and timing of drought stress. Important are the establishment  
of efficient phenotypic screening protocols and using precise phenotypic selection  
criteria (Ouk et al. 2006; Oladosu et al. 2019). From the recent developments in vari- 
ous molecular breeding strategies, precise high-throughput phenotypic technologies  
have been identified for promising traits such as grain yield, and morpho-physiologi- 
cal component traits have shown moderate to high heritability under drought stress  
conditions (Tuberosa  2012; Kumar et al. 2014; Swain et al. 2014; Ali et al. 2017;  
Sahebi et al. 2018; Yadav et al. 2019). Several researchers have used direct selection  
of GY, along with considering other secondary traits using molecular and genomic  
approaches (Oladosu et al. 2019). The results led to the identification of the QTLs and  
genes  that  are  associated  with  these  traits.  Discovering  these  QTLs/genes  that  are  
responsible for tolerance traits is essential for developing crops with tolerance through  
marker-assisted selection or genetic engineering approaches. To this end were identi- 
fied the major-effect drought tolerance QTLs from drought-tolerant rice varieties Apo  
(qDTY1.1,  qDTY2.1,  qDTY3.1,  and  qDTY6.1),  Way  Rarem  (qDTY12.1),  Nagina  22  and  
Dhagaddeshi  (qDTY1.1),  and Vandana  (qDTY2.3  and  qDTY3.2)  (Bernier  et  al.  2007;  
Venuprasad et al.  2009; Vikram et al. 2011, 2015; Ghimire et al. 2012; Dixit et al.  
2014). With the marker-assisted introgression approach, grain yield QTLs with major  
and  consistent  effects  (qDTY1.1,  qDTY2.1,  qDTY2.2,  qDTY3.1,  qDTY3.2,  qDTY6.1,  and  
qDTY12.1)  on  chromosomes  1,  2,  3,  6,  and  12  have  been  validated,  deployed  into  
drought  breeding  programs,  and  successfully  improved  drought-susceptible  rice  
mega- varieties (Kumar et al. 2014, 2017b, 2020; Singh et al. 2016; Sandhu and Kumar  
2017). However, the locally adapted high-yielding commercial mega-varieties show a  
sensitive reaction to other biotic and abiotic stresses. These improved tolerant rice  
varieties have not been able to show a similar yield performance in varied agroecosys- 
tems. Introgression of these major QTLs/genes in a different combination using a  
marker-assisted selection approach provides an opportunity to increase desirable phe- 
notypic traits and thereby improve grain yield. Still, pyramiding of these major QTLs/ 
genes has not been fully exploited due to G × E interaction of this complex trait epis- 
tasis, and pleiotropy could have negative/positive effects on the trait of interest (Li  
1998; Yano et al. 2003; Xu and Crouch 2008). As a consequence, it has been tough to  
make significant genetic improvements in grain yield under drought stress through  
conventional breeding methods. Therefore, the development of large- scale phenotypic  
screening, marker-assisted breeding strategies, and advanced genotyping technolo- 
gies has significantly accelerated varietal improvement programs on drought toler- 
ance. Further, the identification of QTLs/genes affecting grain yield could result in  

----------------------- Page 83-----------------------

70                                                                                         J. Ali et al. 

yield improvement and stability under drought stress. In comparison to the classical  
breeding and genetic mapping approaches, the GSR breeding strategy used SILs and  
designed QTL pyramiding approaches in the development of multiple-stress-tolerant  
rice varieties for improving grain yield under stress conditions. 
    The GSR breeding strategy has three significant advantages: first, the selected few  
SILs require lesser costs in both genotyping and phenotyping; second, the strategy  
significantly increased the power in detecting the genomic regions of QTLs/genes;  
third, the selected lines mostly carried the beneficial alleles of QTLs (Ali et al. 2017).  
Based on the DQP approach, Feng et al. (2018) identified a total of nine drought toler- 
ance  QTLs  on  chromosomes  2,  3,  5,  6,  8,  and  12  using  a  segregation  distortion  
approach. These QTLs were detected from the three different genetic backgrounds of  
trait-specific   SILs,   which   were   generated   from   the   63   SILs   from   the   cross  
HHZ × Teqing, 68 SILs from the cross HHZ × CDR22, and 75 SILs from the cross  
HHZ × OM1723 (Ali et al. 2017). The major significant QTLs on chromosomes 3, 5,  
and 8 were closely associated with the earlier reports of grain yield QTLs and seed  
fertility  QTLs  under  drought  stress.  Similarly,  researchers  exploited  the  genotypic  
information on EB-SILs derived from the 11 donors crossed with recurrent parent  
WTR-1, which comprised a total of 564 diverse SILs used for identifying synony- 
mous  and  non-synonymous  deleterious  polymorphic  SNPs  (Ali  et  al.  2018b).  Of  
these, the significant locus Os01g01689 on chromosome 1 possessed a G/A deleteri- 
ous SNP altering an amino acid from Ala to Thr in the background of Haoannong and  
Y-134. This locus was associated with abiotic stress tolerance. This innovative breed- 
ing strategy addresses the GCV challenge and allows poor farmers to benefit from the  
use  of  stress-tolerant  and  high-yielding  rice  varieties  under  limited  resources.  
Therefore, genotyping the EB-SILs and DQP populations helped to identify several  
promising genomic regions for complex traits and assisted in molecular marker devel- 
opment and genomic applications in molecular breeding programs. 

3.2      Salinity Tolerance 

More than 20% of global agricultural land is affected by salinity, especially in the  
coastal regions of South and Southeast Asian countries. Salinity is mainly caused by  
the  drastic  changes  in  the  climatic  events  that  are  significantly  associated  with  
                                                                                                + 
increases in salinity in the soil. During crop growth stages, the accumulated Na  and  
   − 
Cl   concentrations in plants lead to inhibiting cell expansion and photosynthetic  
activity, followed by changes in physiological and molecular pathways in roots for  
the uptake of water and nutrients, leading to cytotoxic effects. Mainly, the accumu- 
lation of these elements can be processed through osmotic and ionic stresses, which  
can activate the formation of reactive oxygen species (ROS) and cause leaf damage  
or plant death. Thus, developing rice varieties with salinity tolerance is a prominent  
approach to resolve the salinity problem. However, progress in developing salinity- 
tolerant rice varieties has been slow because of the complexity of the salinity toler- 
ance trait, and this has involved multiple physiological and biochemical pathways.  

----------------------- Page 84-----------------------

Green Super Rice (GSR) Traits: Breeding and Genetics for Multiple Biotic and Abiotic…           71 

As of now, several researchers had worked on the complex traits using advanced  
genomic-assisted  breeding  tools  in  traditional  molecular  breeding  strategies  and  
sequencing at the whole-genome level. In the past two decades, >700 QTLs and 200  
genes have been reported for salinity tolerance at different growth stages (Rahman  
et al. 2017; van Oort 2018) (http://archive.gramene.org/). Most of these genes and  
QTLs are associated with different traits such as salt injury score, shoot and root  
                                                              +         + 
growth, fresh and dry weight of shoot and root, Na  and K  content in shoot and  
root, grain yield, and chlorophyll content. The genomic regions of these QTLs and  
genes are involved in the different physiological and molecular mechanisms such as  
ionic equilibrium, osmotic adjustment, transcription regulation, and signaling path- 
way  (Molla  et  al.  2015;  Pradhan  et  al. 2015;  Gimhani  et  al. 2016;  Kumar  et  al.  
2017a). However, the identified genomic regions have a more significant interval  
gap because they employ a low density of molecular markers and possibly because  
of epistatic QTLs and environmental interaction. It’s possible to have hundreds of  
genes in those QTL positions, which makes it difficult to track the genetic pathways. 
    The recent development of genotyping technologies provided robust genotyping  
information  and  can  remarkably  reduce  chromosomal  intervals  and  also  help  in  
identifying accurately predicted gene functions related to the target traits. Dissecting  
these complex traits and identifying superior tolerant lines, the GSR breeding pro- 
gram  began  an  integrated  molecular  breeding  strategy  to  identify  genome-wide  
trait-specific  introgression  lines  (ILs)  through  the  DQP  approach.  Using  high-  
density SNP markers of tGBS technology, three significant QTLs, qSES2, qSES4  
(qChlo4), and  qChlo1, were mapped, and this further narrowed down the list of  
genes through the use of grandparent genotypic information (Pang et al. 2017b). As  
a result of this approach, 13, 34, and 40 candidate genes were identified in the QTLs  
regions, respectively. Pang et al. (2017b) carried out functional analyses of the can- 
didate genes for the salinity-tolerance QTLs to infer two, five, and six genes as the  
most likely candidates of qSES2, qSES4 (qChlo4), and  qChlo1, respectively. This  
combination of high-density SNP markers with parent and grandparent information  
could be a potential approach for identifying the right genes for desired target traits  
in rice. With this strategy, several high-yielding, multi-stress-tolerant rice varieties  
such as NSIC Rc480, NSIC Rc534, NSIC Rc 390, NSIC Rc 392, NSIC Rc 554, and  
NSIC Rc 556 were developed and released for cultivation under saline conditions  
(Guan et al. 2010; Ali et al. 2017; Yu et al. 2020). 

3.3      Submergence Tolerance 

Submergence is an essential factor that limits rice yield over 15 million ha in rainfed  
lowland regions of Asia (Septiningsih et al. 2009). Rice is known to adapt well to  
flooded conditions, but most rice cultivars become vulnerable upon complete sub- 
mergence. Complete submergence of rice plants, particularly under turbid water,  
causes severe damage through decreased respiration and photosynthesis (Ella et al.  
2003; Bailey-Serres et al. 2010). Submergence tolerance is an important trait that  

----------------------- Page 85-----------------------

72                                                                                      J. Ali et al. 

could help rice plants to overcome flooding with a water head of 1 m for 14 days at  
the  active  tillering  stage.  The  genetics  of  submergence  tolerance  from  FR13A  
showed a high heritability and was governed by both major genes and some quanti- 
tative  trait  loci  (QTLs)  (Suprihatno  and  Coffman   1981;  Nandi  et  al.  1997;  
Sripongpangkul et al. 2000; Toojinda et al. 2003). Xu et al. (2006) used FR13A for  
cloning Sub1A, a major QTL on chromosome 9, which is a transcription factor con- 
cerning ethylene responsiveness. Sub1A-1, one of the alleles at Sub1A, was found to  
be essential for submrgence tolerance in several semi-dwarf varieties (Septiningsih  
et al. 2009). Ali et al. (2006) demonstrated that progenies with submergence toler- 
ance were identified consistently in most BC populations derived from sensitive  
parents. This suggested the presence of hidden genetic diversity for submergence  
tolerance in the primary gene pool of rice. Wang et al. (2015) determined the genetic  
basis of submergence tolerance in rice and facilitated the simultaneous improve- 
ment  of  submergence  tolerance  in  rice.  In  their  study,  they  characterized  the  
genome-wide responses of 162 SILs with submergence tolerance from 12 BC popu- 
lations using SSR markers that helped in the dissection of the hidden diversity and  
transgressive segregation. Their results provided insights into the genetic basis of  
submergence tolerance of rice and demonstrated a novel strategy for simultaneous  
improvement and genetic dissection of complex traits using the approach of selec- 
tive introgression (Li et al. 2005). The genome-wide responses of donor alleles to  
strong phenotypic selection for submergence tolerance can be understood with three  
key findings from Wang et al. (2015). First, they found significant over- introgression  
of the donor alleles at 295 loci in 167 functional genetic units (FGUs) across the rice  
genome. Second, they observed significantly increased homozygosity or “loss of  
heterozygosity”      genome-wide.        Third,    pronounced      non-random        associations  
between or among the detected submergence tolerance loci led to the discovery of  
putative genetic networks (multi-loci structures) underlying submergence tolerance  
in rice. Further, their results suggested that submergence tolerance of rice is con- 
trolled by large numbers of loci involved in multiple positively regulated signaling  
pathways (Wang et al. 2015). It is essential here to understand that the restoration of  
one or more of these broken pathways in the BC progenies by genetic complemen- 
tation from the introgressed functional donor alleles at submergence tolerance loci  
provided an appropriate explanation for the transgressive segregation of submer- 
gence tolerance and this could be extended to other complex traits in rice. The GSR  
breeding strategy developed several promising salinity-tolerant materials such as  
NSIC Rc480, GSR 5, and GSR11. Yorobe et al. (2016) found that the mean differ- 
ence  in  net  farm  income  between  GSR  and  non-GSR  varieties  was  positive  and  
significant and gave farmers an income advantage of USD 230.90/ha for GSR vari- 
ety users. In their study, Yorobe et al. (2016) found that, with a high occurrence of  
flooding in the wet season, the use of GSR varieties assured rice farmers of a posi- 
tive net farm income. 

----------------------- Page 86-----------------------

Green Super Rice (GSR) Traits: Breeding and Genetics for Multiple Biotic and Abiotic…                   73 

3.4      Nutrient-Use Efficiency  

Nutrient-use efficiency (NUE) is one of the most critical traits for increasing  
yield and productivity by using nutrients such as nitrogen (N), phosphorus (P),  
and potassium (K) to increase NUE. During the Green Revolution (GR) period  
in the 1960s and post-GR, yield increased significantly, and this was primarily  
achieved with a higher input dosage of fertilizer, pesticide, and water (Ali et al.  
2018b). Recently, Hawkesford and Griffiths (2019) mentioned that only 33% of  
global N is recovered from harvested grain, while the remaining N is a signifi- 
cant pollutant and a colossal waste of resources. A higher amount of fertilizer  
application  can  lead  to  a  substantial  imbalance  in  nutrient  availability  in  the  
soil, increase the risk of pests and diseases, and not be cost-effective for poor  
farmers (Chen et al.  2014a, b ; Rahman and Zhang 2018). Regarding environ- 
mental safety and the use of low inputs in farmers’ fields, the GSR breeding  
team started a program at IRRI to identify nutrient-use- efficient breeding lines  
that could obtain higher grain yield under integrated nutrient management tech- 
niques. This was the first initiative in the NUE breeding program at IRRI (Jewel  
et al. 2018) and it was reported as a unique and systematic breeding approach  
through  the  selection  of  SILs  with  higher  NUE  through  the  early  backcross  
breeding program. SILs were selected in four consecutive seasons under differ- 
ent nutrient fertilizer combinations of N, P, and K dosages. Five promising SILs  
(Nue-115,  Nue-114,  Nue-112,  Nue-229,  and  Nue-230)  were  identified  with  
higher grain yield and nutrient-use efficiency. These SILs could provide valu- 
able information for rice breeding programs. The genetics of NUE (Mahender  
et al. 2019) identified a total of 19 QTLs that were associated with three agro- 
nomic  traits  by  using  tGBS  technology.  These  major  QTLs  were  located  on  
chromosomes 2, 5, 8, 9, and 12. The genomic regions of these QTLs were co- 
localized  with  earlier  reports  of  low  nitrogen  and  phosphorus  conditions.  
Importantly, in silico analysis of these QTL positions suggested that several key  
candidate genes played a major role in the various molecular and physiological  
pathways  in  response  to  abiotic  stress  tolerance  and  also  maintenance  of  the  
homeostasis  mechanism  under  low-input  conditions.  Similarly,  Jewel  et  al.  
(2019) detected a total of 49 main-effect QTLs under six nutrient conditions.  
These QTLs explained a phenotypic variance range from 20.25 to 34.68%. They  
were located on all 12 chromosomes, except on chromosomes 7, 11, and 12.  
Among them, four hotspot QTLs were identified on chromosomes 3, 5, 9, and  
11.  Interestingly,  22  QTLs  for  partial  factor  productivity  and  four  QTLs  for  
agronomic  efficiency  were  detected  as  novel  under  –P  and  75  N  conditions.  
Several  genes  and  transporters  were  located  in  the  interval  regions  of  these  
QTLs, and they were involved in nutrient uptake and transporting mechanisms  
from soil to plants. Therefore, the hotspot regions of QTLs and genes may offer  
significant value for marker-assisted selection and pyramiding of multiple QTLs  
for improving NUE in rice. 

----------------------- Page 87-----------------------

74                                                                                      J. Ali et al. 

3.5      Weed-Competitive Ability Traits 

Threats such as GCV, rising labor shortages, decreasing arable land, and the increas- 
ing prices of fertilizer and pesticide are the major contributors to the decrease in rice  
production (Singh et al.  2013). To overcome these constraints, shifting from the  
manual rice transplanting system to direct-seeded rice (DSR) is the most promising  
approach  to  improve  rice  sustainability  (Chauhan  and Abugho  2013;  Mahender  
et al. 2015). It has numerous benefits, mainly in decreasing water use by 35–75%,  
decreasing labor demand, shortening crop duration, mitigating methane gas emis- 
sions, and lowering the cost of cultivation (Mahender et al. 2015; Dimaano et al.  
2017). However, vigorous growth of weeds is one of the most complicated biologi- 
cal constraints in the DSR system to attaining optimal grain yield (Antralina et al.  
2015; Chauhan et al. 2015a, b; Jabran and Chauhan 2015). Several options such as  
tillage operations and herbicide application are available to control weeds, but these  
are laborious and costly (Rahman et al. 2012). Globally, more than USD 100 billion  
are lost annually because of weed control (Appleby et al. 2002). Therefore, develop- 
ing a breeding strategy for weed-competitive (WC) rice varieties is a critical solu- 
tion for decreasing tillage operations, hand weeding, and herbicide inputs in the  
DSR  system.  WC  ability  is  a  complex  trait,  and  it  interacts  with  several  agro-  
morphological traits (Chauhan et al. 2015a; Raj and Syriac 2017). Thus, it is essen- 
tial to understand the trait interactions and mechanisms that confer WC ability, and  
this could be useful for speeding up the breeding activities for developing WC rice  
cultivars. Recently, as a part of the GSR breeding program at IRRI, Chauhan et al.  
(2015b) and Dimaano et al. (2017) followed a systematic breeding effort to identify  
WC ability traits related to early seed germination (ESG) and early seedling vigor  
(ESV). The breeding materials were developed from the four early generations of  
backcross populations derived from one common recipient parent, Weed Tolerant  
Rice-1 (WTR-1), and four donors, Y134, Zhong 143, Khazar, and Cheng Hui-448.  
These  SILs  were  evaluated  over  three  rounds  of  selection  in  upland  weed-free,  
upland  weedy,  and  lowland  weedy  conditions. Among  the  total  SILs,  five  (G-6-  
L2-WL-3, G-6-RF6-WL-3, G-6-L15-WU-1, G-6-Y16-WL-2, and G-6-L6-WU-3)  
were found to be promising in lowland weedy conditions, whereas four SILs (G-6-  
Y7-WL-3, G-6-Y6-WU-3, G-6-Y3-WL-3, and G-6-Y8-WU-1) were found to have  
the highest grain yield under upland weedy conditions (Dimaano et al. 2017). The  
primary requirements for the DSR system to be successful are the following: unifor- 
mity and speed of germination rate and early seedling growth are significantly asso- 
ciated with robust and vigorous crop growth and a better crop establishment, which  
can influence WC ability (Cui et al. 2002; Foolad et al. 2007; Diwan et al. 2013;  
Dang et al. 2014). These traits can provide support for traits attributed to efficient  
root growth that can help in the absorption of more nutrients (Farooq et al.  2011;  
Matsushima  and  Sakagami  2013;  Singh  et  al.  2015;  Khan  et  al.  2016).  For  the  
molecular genetics of WC rice cultivars, a total of 43 QTLs were mapped on all 12  
chromosomes, except on chromosomes 4 and 8, by using 677 high-quality SNP  
markers (Dimaano et al. 2020). Interestingly, 29 novel genetic loci were associated  

----------------------- Page 88-----------------------

Green Super Rice (GSR) Traits: Breeding and Genetics for Multiple Biotic and Abiotic…                                   75 

with ESG and ESV traits on chromosomes 1, 3, 5, 6, 7, 10, 11, and 12. The hotspot  
regions of chromosomes 11 and 12 were associated with multiple traits (Dimaano  
et al. 2020). Many of these QTLs were co-localized in previous reports, which are  
related to germination rate, germination index, germination percentage, and germi- 
nation time in different genetic backgrounds of mapping populations (Mahender  
et  al.  2015).  In  addition,  some  critical  genes  located  in  the  co-localized  hotspot  
regions can influence the regulation of various physiological functions such as chlo- 
roplast development, photosynthesis, hybrid sterility, seed development, and seed- 
ling  lethality  during  plant  growth  stages  (Gothandam  et  al.  2005;  Matthus  et  al.  
2015; Sharma and Pandey 2016; Yu et al. 2016). Therefore, the hotspot regions with  
co-localized QTLs and genes may have a more significant role in the improvement  
of weed-competitiveness, mainly in African and Asian countries, to decrease rice  
production costs. 

3.6       Low-Temperature Stress Tolerance at Different Crop   
          Growth Stages 

Rice is one of the most sensitive among the cereal crops to low-temperature stress  
(LTS)/cold stress (CS), mainly at the germination to booting stage, which can cause  
a significant yield decrease due to reduced germination rate and seedling growth,  
high spikelet sterility, delay in flowering, and lower grain filling (Ranawake et al.  
2014; Schläppi et al. 2017; Shakiba et al. 2017; Najeeb et al. 2020). The drastic  
changes in GCV in rice-growing areas mainly in the tropical, subtropical, and tem- 
perate  regions  had  severe  effects  from  low-temperature  stress  during  the  critical  
stages of seedling growth and pollen abortion at the booting stage, leading to grain  
yield decreases (Ye et al. 2009; Jena et al. 2010; Sun et al. 2018). LTS mainly inhib- 
its sugar accumulation in the pollen and further leads to male sterility, which is  
regulated by the invertase enzyme through the hormone abscisic acid (ABA) path- 
ways that transport sugar to the tapetum. The results of these mechanisms decrease  
invertase amounts in susceptible rice varieties, leading to lower pollination (Oliver  
et  al.  2007).  This  situation  warrants  the  development  of  LTS-tolerant  varieties  
through a systematic breeding effort to increase rice production in 25 countries,  
including the major rice-producing countries (Cruz et al. 2013; Zhang et al. 2017).  
Therefore, to minimize yield losses under LTS, particularly in cold-affected regions,  
it is crucial to identify potential donors to improve LTS tolerance. LTS tolerance  
breeding  for  widely  adapted  and  high-yielding  rice  cultivars  is  needed  to  meet  
future food demand worldwide. 
     Information on the genomic regions of QTLs and genes governing tolerance of  
LTS  is  limited  for  different  growth  stage-specific  traits  in  rice  due  to  its  complex  
nature, and this significantly influences QTL × environment interactions. Up to now,  
several studies have been reported for QTL mapping for LTS. Recently, Najeeb et al.  
(2020) reviewed the genetics of LTS tolerance QTLs in rice. A total of 239 and 339  

----------------------- Page 89-----------------------

76                                                                                         J. Ali et al. 

QTLs were identified on 12 chromosomes using genome-wide association studies and  
biparental mapping populations, respectively (http://archive.gramene.org). However,  
mapping of the sensitive stage, especially at the reproductive phase of a complex trait,  
involves  multiple  genes,  environment  interactions,  and  difficulties  in  phenotypic  
screening. Despite these large numbers of QTLs for LTS, a few of them were studied  
for fine-mapping and cloning. Based on the public domain and rice database, a total  
of 38 candidate genes were functionally characterized for LTS tolerance. Importantly,  
four genes on chromosome 1 (OsCOIN, OsGSK1, OsGH3-2, and OsMYB3R-2), two  
genes on chromosome 6 (OsiSAP8 and OsbZIP52,) and a single gene on chromosome  
4 (OsCAF1B) and chromosome 11 (OsAsr1) were significantly associated with LTS  
tolerance in the seedling and reproductive stage in rice. In contrast, breeding strategies  
for LTS tolerance remained a slow process by conventional methods because most of  
the QTL mapping methods could not explain G × E interaction well and appropriate  
statistical and advanced breeding strategies were lacking. Improvement of LTS toler- 
ance  at  the  reproductive  stage  is  needed  through  a  selective  introgression  method  
(Liang et al. 2018). A population was derived from BC F  onward using five donors 2 4 
and a japonica  (Geng) recipient parent that were screened over three rounds to select  
under LTS conditions at the reproductive stage. This approach helped in dissecting the  
complex trait of LTS tolerance and developed trait-specific introgression lines. A total  
of 17 QTLs were identified using five different populations of EB-SIL derived from  
five different donors into a common recipient parent. Further, multi-locus probability  
tests and linkage disequilibrium results showed that a total of 46 functional genetic  
units were distributed across the rice genome for cold tolerance. Studies showed the  
presence of strong epistasis and power of the statistical approach for the development  
of selective introgressions for simultaneous improvement and genetic dissection of  
complex traits. Zhu et al. (2015) used an inter-connected breeding (IB) population  
comprising 497 SILs derived from eight BC families with the same recipient parent  
for identifying and fine-mapping QTLs for LTS tolerance at the booting stage. A total  
of 41,754 high-quality SNPs were obtained through the re-sequencing of the IB popu- 
lation. Phenotyping was conducted under field conditions in 2 years and three loca- 
tions. Association analysis identified six QTLs for LTS tolerance on chromosomes 3,  
4, and 12. The stably expressed QTL qCT-3-2 was fine-mapped and narrowed down  
to  approximately  192.9  kb  on  the  reference  genome  (Zhu  et  al.  2015).  The  QTL  
qCT-3-2 is essential for developing varieties with LTS tolerance at the booting stage,  
which  are  in  high  demand  in  temperate  and  high-altitude  rice  production  regions.  
GWAS applied to an IB population allowed better integration of gene discovery and  
breeding. QTLs can be mapped in high resolution and quickly used for breeding. 

3.7      Grain Quality 

Improvement of grain quality traits (grain appearance, cooking and eating quality)  
is a major concern in rice breeding programs. Earlier rice breeding efforts over the  
past  few  decades  primarily  focused  on  increasing  grain  yield  potential  as  the  

----------------------- Page 90-----------------------

Green Super Rice (GSR) Traits: Breeding and Genetics for Multiple Biotic and Abiotic…            77 

primary  target  in  the  major Asian  rice-growing  countries,  and  most  of  the  high-  
yielding  and  popular  rice  varieties  had  poor  grain  quality  traits  (Custodio  et  al.  
2019). Approximately one-third of the global population is suffering from nutri- 
tional deficiency, mainly caused by inferior grain quality traits such as low protein  
content and lack of vitamins and minerals (Balyan et al. 2013). Therefore, to meet  
the global food demand, it is essential to keep nutritional quality traits integrated  
well in our breeding programs. Consumer acceptance and their preferred grain traits  
are major factors that influence different markets across the globe. For instance,  
grain appearance traits such as long and slender grain shape are mostly preferred in  
countries  such  as  India,  Vietnam,  the  United  States,  and  most  Asian  countries,  
whereas  northern  China,  Korea,  and  Japan  prefer  short  and  round  rice  grains  
(Unnevehr et al.  1985; Cuevas et al. 2016). Improvement in grain quality is for a  
complex  trait  involving  many  traits  such  as  milling  efficiency,  grain  appearance  
(size and shape), and cooking and eating quality (apparent amylose content, gelati- 
nization  temperature,  gel  consistency).  Many  of  these  grain  quality  component  
traits are highly complex and quantitative in nature and are significantly influenced  
by environmental factors. In a global view, grain shape traits need to be understood,  
matching market and consumer preferences and needing to be adequately addressed  
in breeding programs for different target regions. Several researchers have identified  
many critical genetic loci and candidate genes for grain quality traits (Yun et al.  
2014; Balakrishnan et al. 2016; Pang et al. 2016; Wang et al. 2017; Mogga et al.  
2018; Kavurikalpana and Shashidhara 2018; Wing et al. 2018; Bazrkar-khatibani  
et  al.  2019;  Calayugan  et  al.  2020;  Zhang  et  al.  2020).  Mahender  et  al.  (2016)  
reviewed grain nutritional traits and associated genetic information on QTLs and  
genes in rice. More than 400 QTLs have been reported for these grain quality traits,  
including grain appearance and cooking and nutritional properties (Mahender et al.  
2016; Bazrkar-khatibani et al. 2019). 
    As of now, 28 major genes are involved in controlling grain shape and 65 genes  
are   associated   with   eating   quality   traits   in   rice   (http://qtaro.abr.affrc.go.jp/).  
Importantly, the natural variation of eating quality genes such as ALK and WAXY on  
chromosome 6, Badh-2 on chromosome 8, and LOX-3 on chromosome 3 regulates  
cooking quality traits and encodes the strong component in rice fragrance (Chen  
et al. 2008; Shirasawa et al. 2008; Gao et al. 2011; Venu et al. 2011; Wang et al.  
2017). Similarly, overexpression of the six genes (OASA2, BiP, OASA1D, OsAAT1,  
OsAAT2,  OsISA1,  and  OsISA2)  on  chromosomes  1,  2,  3,  5,  and  8  significantly  
increased amino acid content and seed storage protein content in rice grain (Zhou  
et al. 2009; Saika et al. 2011; Utsumi et al. 2011). Recent successful GSR breeding  
strategies help to a great extent to understand the various green traits that include  
grain quality and biotic and abiotic stress tolerance genes that have been cloned (Yu  
et al. 2020). These include the critical genes OsAAP6 on chromosome 1,  OsGRF4  
on chromosome 2, three genes (GNP1, lgy3, and GL3) on chromosome 3, two genes  
(Chalk5 and  GW5) on chromosome 5, two genes (W7 and  OsSPL13) on chromo- 
some  7,  and  a  single  gene  (OsOTUB1)  on  chromosome  8  associated  with  grain  
quality  traits,  and  some  of  these  genes  are  significantly  associated  with  yield-  
attributed traits and NUE traits (Li et al. 2018). Recently, Mahender et al. (2019)  

----------------------- Page 91-----------------------

78                                                                                                J. Ali et al. 

identified 19 QTLs for agro-morphological traits under different dosages of nutrient  
fertilizer. Interestingly, one of the major QTLs for leaf chlorophyll content on chro- 
mosome 2 and in the same genomic region co-localized with the nitrate transporter  
OsNPF7.2  and  GROWTH-REGULATOR  FACTOR  4  (OsGRF4).  These  hotspot  
genomic regions play a vital role in the interaction of GRF4 and DELLA proteins  
that are involved in multiple gene regulation related to grain quality traits and that  
also   maintain   homeostatic   coordination   of   nitrogen   and   carbon   metabolism  
(Serrano-Mislata et al. 2017; Li et al. 2018; Xing et al. 2018). 

3.8      Biotic Stress Tolerance  

Rice  grain  yield  declined  globally  by  more  than  52%  because  of  various  biotic  
stresses such as insect pests (brown planthopper, green rice leafhopper, and yellow  
stem  borer)  and  diseases  (bacterial  leaf  blight,  blast,  sheath  blight,  and  tungro).  
Yield was severely affected in the rice-growing countries of Asia and Africa (Van  
Oort and Zwart 2018). These biotic stresses significantly cause annual crop losses  
that threaten global food security. According to the estimation of Roy-Barman and  
Chattoo (2005), global yield losses annually are equivalent to the quantity required  
to feed 60 million people. Worldwide, fungal disease alone is estimated at 14% of  
the annual rice yield decline. Hence, significant changes in GCV lead to increased  
extreme weather patterns and this combined with increasing air temperatures are the  
leading causes of the spread of disease into different areas, which has also differed  
from region to region and from one agroecology to another (Anderson et al. 2004;  
Agrios  2005). Therefore, exploiting the diverse resources of rice germplasm and  
understanding the host-plant resistance mechanism at molecular genetics and cel- 
lular levels will provide a viable option to manage this disease vis-à-vis the applica- 
tion  of  various  pesticides.  For  better  management  of  biotic  stresses,  integrative  
strategies are required for the selection of resistant rice varieties, and identifying  
QTLs and genes to understand the genetics of resistance from advanced genotyping  
technologies  and  pathogen  races.  This  will  deliver  valuable  information  for  the  
development of future climate-smart rice varieties. 
    Recent  progress  in  QTL  and  gene/allele  identification  technologies,  marker-  
assisted  selection  (MAS),  and  advanced  genomic  techniques  has  been  used  to  
develop disease and insect resistance in rice. The molecular genetics of the resis- 
tance to the various pathogens has been well documented through conventional or  
molecular  marker-assisted  breeding  strategies. Therefore,  the  use  of  this  disease  
resistance and insect resistance in genomic regions of QTLs and genes provides the  
most cost-effective and prominent approach for decreasing pesticide use. To date,  
more than 100 genes for blast resistance, 40 genes for bacterial blight resistance, 34  
genes for brown planthopper resistance, 11 genes for general insect resistance, and  
6 genes for sheath blight resistance have been identified on different chromosomes  
(http://qtaro.abr.affrc.go.jp/). Further, some of these genes have been isolated and  
functionally  characterized  (http://qtaro.abr.affrc.go.jp/).  However,  the  two  major  

----------------------- Page 92-----------------------

Green Super Rice (GSR) Traits: Breeding and Genetics for Multiple Biotic and Abiotic…        79 

diseases (blast and BLB) frequently affect crop yield and decrease it in most rice-  
growing regions worldwide. These cloned genes are providing valuable sources to  
understand the interaction between the disease and host, pathogen mechanism, and,  
further, as a means to enhance resistance mechanisms in the various backgrounds  
using  marker-assisted  breeding  and  genetic  engineering  approaches.  However,  
breakdown  of  the  resistance  of  a  single  gene  has  also  been  identified  after  2  or  
3 years. This indicates changes in the frequency of pathotypes or the emergence of  
new ones through mutations and other mechanisms. Therefore, to develop broad-  
spectrum resistance in rice varieties by stacking multiple resistance genes or QTLs  
into a single rice variety seeks to provide resistance to a wide range of races as  
compared to one or two gene combinations. 
   Pyramiding of multiple resistance genes is a useful molecular breeding strategy  
for the expression simultaneously of more than one gene to achieve durable resis- 
tance against desired target diseases, and it also needs to prevent or delay the break- 
down of resistance (Shinada et al. 2014; Feng et al. 2018; Kumar et al. 2018; Liu  
et  al.  2020). Ashkani  et  al.  (2015)  have  reviewed  different  successful  molecular  
breeding schemes and gene pyramiding strategies to improve biotic disease resis- 
tance genes in rice. Notably, Ji et al. (2016) used a gene pyramiding strategy to  
develop restorer lines with resistance to multiple diseases: blast (Pita, Pi1, and Pi2),  
bacterial blight (Xa23 and xa5), and brown planthopper (Bph3). Therefore, restorer  
lines are useful in hybrid rice breeding programs. In the GSR breeding program,  
several biotic disease-resistance QTLs and cloned genes have been used in develop- 
ing novel GSR breeding materials. Pi2, Xa23, Bph14, and Bph15 genes have been  
mainly  introgressed  into  different  GSR  lines.  Recently,  a  novel  gene,  Bph38(t),  
identified on chromosome 1 explained phenotypic variation of 35.9% in a backcross  
population derived from a cross of HHZ and Khazar (Balachiranjeevi et al. 2019).  
The development of molecular mapping and functional genomics of insect resis- 
tance revealed that most of the BPH resistance genes were clustered together in  
specific regions on different chromosomes (3, 4, 6, and 12), except for bph5, bph8,  
and BPH22(t) to BPH24(t). For example, 8 genes were located in the 19.1–24.4 Mb  
region on chromosome 12 and 12 genes in the 4.1–8.9 Mb region on chromosome 4  
(Du et al. 2020). These clustered genes provide a valuable resource for identifying  
specific alleles and interaction of the different genes that are involved in the molecu- 
lar and physiological pathways for the insect resistance mechanism in rice. 

4     Molecular Genetics and Breeding Strategies to Combine  
     Multiple Stresses 

To develop rice varieties with multiple stress tolerance along with superior grain  
yield  and  quality,  breeders  are  exploring  different  breeding  strategies.  However,  
limited  progress  has  been  made  in  this  direction  through  conventional  breeding  
approaches, which are lengthy and laborious processes. Recently available genotyp- 
ing  technologies  such  as  SNP  chips,  genotyping  by  sequencing  (GBS),  and  

----------------------- Page 93-----------------------

80                                                                                        J. Ali et al. 

whole- genome  sequencing  (WGS)  have  led  to  the  identification  of  major-effect  
QTLs associated with the complex abiotic stresses such as drought, salinity, and  
flooding in rice (Guo et al. 2014; Wang et al. 2017; Ali et al. 2018b; Le Nguyen et al.  
2019; Yadav et al. 2019). The identification of molecular markers tightly associated  
with a trait is valuable for marker-assisted selection. The marker-assisted breeding  
efforts that began at IRRI led to the identification of a major QTL, Sub1, derived  
from FR13A, an Indian landrace; qDTY1.1 and qDTY2.1 from drought-tolerant geno- 
type Apo;  qDTY12.1  from Way  Rarem;  and  Saltol  identified  from  Pokkali,  which  
showed  large  effects  across  different  genetic  backgrounds.  Deployment  of  these  
QTLs  in  molecular  breeding  strategies  paved  the  way  for  the  development  and  
release of rice varieties such as Swarna-Sub1, Samba Mahsuri-Sub1, Swarna-Sub1,  
DRR  Dhan-50,  and  CR  Dhan  802,  which  are  suitable  for  different  ecosystems  
(Bhandari et al. 2019). Most of the rice-growing areas in the rainfed environment in  
South and Southeast Asia are frequently affected by multiple abiotic stresses even  
within the same cropping season near the coastal areas. Therefore, developing new  
breeding  materials  that  could  tolerate  multiple  stresses  and  also  provide  higher  
grain yield is essential for global food security. 
    Over the past decade, there have been only a few significant reports on pyramid- 
ing QTLs for stacking multiple traits in the different backgrounds of popular high-  
yielding rice varieties through MAS approaches. The identified superior and stable  
lines across different environments and having acceptable grain quality traits are  
promoted for release in different countries. Pyramiding of the major biotic and abi- 
otic stress-tolerance QTL combinations has been used in different breeding strate- 
gies for developing rice varieties with multiple-stress tolerance (Zhu et al.  2015;  
Dixit et al. 2017; Pang et al. 2017b; Feng et al. 2018; Kumar et al. 2018). Recently,  
Muthu et al. (2020) developed an improved White Ponni, a popular high-yielding  
rice variety with significant tolerance against drought, salinity, and submergence by  
introgressing  major-effect  QTLs  (qDTY1.1,  qDTY2.1,  Saltol,  and  Sub1)  through  a  
marker-assisted backcross breeding approach. However, the innovative Green Super  
Rice breeding strategy successfully demonstrated that a high genetic diversity exists  
within the primary gene pool for improving multiple-stress-tolerance traits, espe- 
cially for rainfed environments (Ali et al. 2006, 2017). Stringent simultaneous phe- 
notypic selection by screening under multiple abiotic stresses in the early generations  
has a major advantage in developing trait-specific backcross inbred lines with sig- 
nificantly  improved  tolerance. This  provides  an  opportunity  for  the  discovery  of  
genes/QTLs  underlying  the  target  and  non-target  traits.  With  the  GSR  breeding  
strategy  within  the  span  of  7  years,  a  total  of  27  IRRI-bred  GSR  varieties  were  
released, and more than 104 rice varieties have been nominated for national coop- 
erative yield trials from three recipient parents and 16 donors. These varieties are  
now being cultivated on more than 2.7 million ha on a seed distribution basis alone  
for farmers in Asia and Africa (Ali et al. 2017; Feng et al. 2018; Yu et al. 2020). The  
integration of advanced genotyping technology such as SNP genotyping array and  
tGBS in the GSR breeding program provides a high-quality SNP calling accuracy  
with a low percentage of missing rates across populations. This genotyping infor- 
mation from SNPs is an excellent source for understanding the genetics of green  

----------------------- Page 94-----------------------

Green Super Rice (GSR) Traits: Breeding and Genetics for Multiple Biotic and Abiotic…                 81 

traits and can be used for dissecting many complex traits by using marker-trait asso- 
ciation studies (Wing et al.  2018; Feng et al. 2018). Among the various breeding  
populations,   the   early   backcross-selective   introgression   lines   (EB-SILS)   and  
designed QTL pyramiding (DQP) approach have proven to be an effective strategy  
for dissecting complex traits such as drought, salinity, and low-temperature stress  
tolerance;  arsenic  toxicity  tolerance;  and  nutrient-use  efficiency  (Dimaano  et  al.  
2017; Pang et al. 2017b; Ali et al. 2018b; Feng et al. 2018; Mahender et al. 2019;  
Murugaiyan et al. 2019; Najeeb et al. 2020). So far, more than 3200 genes have been  
listed in Oryzabase, and they were associated with a wide range of stress-tolerance  
mechanisms in biotic and abiotic stresses (https://shigen.nig.ac.jp/rice/oryzabase/).  
More than 1800 genes were functionally characterized and deposited in the Q-TARO  
(QTL  Annotation  Rice  Online)  database  (http://qtaro.abr.affrc.go.jp/).  Of  these,  
cloned rice genes associated with tolerance of multiple biotic stresses (diseases and  
insect pests) and abiotic stresses (drought, salinity, flooding, anaerobic germination,  
low nutrient-use efficiency) and also grain quality traits (for eating) are a vital con- 
cern in GSR breeding. The availability of rice genome annotation and functionally  
characterized genes from these two databases are highlighted in Fig. 4. The main  
focus of green traits involves the genes governing them: 104 for drought tolerance,  
95 for salinity tolerance, 60 for low-input tolerance, 52 for cold tolerance, and 8 for  
submergence tolerance. These are also referred to as green genes, and they mostly  
represent resource-saving and environment-friendly approaches. As a result of the  
molecular genetics of green traits in the GSR breeding program, a total of 225 QTLs  
and 332 candidate genes have been identified on 12 chromosomes, and, trait-wise,  
each is explained in Table 2 and Fig. 2. 

Fig. 4   Distribution of cloned genes in rice. (a) The important genes associated with green traits  
were highlighted across the 12 chromosomes using a Phenogram plot. (b) Traits were associated  
with the number of genes functionally characterized and these genes provide a valuable resource  
for  understanding  the  complex  nature  of  stress  tolerance  and  adaptive  traits.  (Source:  https:// 
orygenesdb.cirad.fr/data.html and http://qtaro.abr.affrc.go.jp/) 

----------------------- Page 95-----------------------

82                                                                                                           J. Ali et al. 

     In the genomic region of these QTL positions, a large number of candidate genes  
were identified through the in silico database and many of them have known func- 
tions related to green traits. Also, a few of them have unknown functions. The com- 
prehensive literature survey and rice genomic database showed that genes such as  
OsCOIN,  OsDREB2A,  OsGSK1,  and  OsDREB1F  on  chromosome  1;  OsGS1;2,  
OsMYB2, and ZFP182 on chromosome 3; OsTPS1 on chromosome 5; OsDREB1C  
and  OsiSAP8 on chromosome 6;  OsDREB1B and  OsDREB1A on chromosome 9;  
and  OsNAC5 on chromosome 11 are responsible for the multiple stress-tolerance  
mechanism.  These  genes  act  in  ABA  signaling  pathways,  hormonal  regulation,  
accumulation of sugar and other compatible solutes such as proline, and also many  
other developmental and physiological processes involved in the regulation of the  
multiple  stress-tolerance  mechanism.  Most  of  the  multiple  stress-tolerance  gene  
expression is induced by ABA, and it depends on the presence of a cis-acting ele- 
ment referred to as ABA-responsive element (ABRE). These ABA-independent and  
dependent signaling pathways are involved in stress responses including drought,  
cold,   heat,   and   cold.   However,   certain   genomic   regions   on   chromosome   1  
(33.16–33.97           Mb;       40.15–41.90           Mb),       chromosome            3     (11.07–11.75           Mb;  
35.01–35.56 Mb), and chromosome 9 (21.13–21.98 Mb) played a significant role in  
the biotic and abiotic stress-tolerance pathways. They mainly played a role in major  
ABA signaling pathways and other stress signal transduction mechanisms in regu- 
lating  stress  tolerance  and  crosstalk  between  the  other  transcription  factors  to  
enhance  gene  regulation  against  multiple  stresses.  These  overlapping  stress- 
tolerance genes and transcription factors regulating similar stress-tolerance signal- 
ing  pathways  exist  besides  the  crosstalk  among  the  biotic  and  abiotic  stresses.  
However, the hotspot genomic regions of cloned genes and their validation with  
earlier reports will provide an improved understanding of the molecular and physi- 
ological mechanisms in response to stress tolerance to help in the improvement of  
grain yield and quality traits in rice. 

4.1       Dissecting the Stress-Regulated Mechanisms for Multiple   
          Stress Tolerance 

Simultaneous exposure to a single or multiple biotic and abiotic stresses strongly  
affects crop production, mainly in the rice-growing countries of Asia and Africa. In  
most  of  the  rice-growing  regions  in  the  rainfed  environment,  drought  stress  is  a  
major factor affecting about 23 million hectares in Southeast Asia and, combined  
with biotic stresses such as diseases and insects, along with rising temperatures,  
could further significantly decrease grain yield (Aghamolki et al. 2014; Bahuguna  
et al. 2018). The response of the plant’s tolerance mechanism and adaptive strate- 
gies toward multiple stresses are significantly limited. It is crucial to understand this  
at the genomics and metabolic levels because of non-additive interactions, extensive  
overlaps, and crosstalk between stress-response signaling pathways, and also the  
interactions between transcription factors (TFs) and cis-elements on the promoters  

----------------------- Page 96-----------------------

Green Super Rice (GSR) Traits: Breeding and Genetics for Multiple Biotic and Abiotic…    83 

of target genes (Kissoudis et al. 2014; Verma and Deepti 2016). Generally, the com- 
bination of biotic and abiotic stress impacts depends on two factors: the host toler- 
ance/susceptibility  mechanism  and  the  interaction  of  plant-microbial  reactions,  
which  influence  stress  responses  to  plants.  However,  a  few  common  morpho-  
physiological traits such as leaf wilting, tiller number, harvest index, root growth  
pattern, and chlorophyll content have been identified in the case of both drought and  
bacterial infections. They further decrease the photosynthetic machinery and dimin- 
ish grain yield (Pandey et al. 2017). Importantly, the central role of hormonal bal- 
ance and interaction is the critical controller of genes that play a significant role in  
regulating the stress-tolerance genes that are involved in different molecular and  
physiological mechanisms for multiple stresses. Hormonal interaction is regulated  
by  ethylene, ABA,  salicylic  acid,  jasmonic  acid,  cytokinin,  and  brassinosteroid.  
They, in turn, regulate several growth development traits. They also connect to the  
multiple  stress  signaling  pathways  to  regulate  stress-responsive  gene  expression  
(Vemanna et al.  2019). The receptor of these hormones regulates the various TF  
families such as NAC, AP2/ERF, bZIP, and MYC, which have altered the stress  
response to biotic and abiotic stresses (Huang et al. 2011; Li et al. 2018). However,  
integration  of  the  omics  approach  has  provided  more  profound  insights  into  the  
molecular mechanisms for a better understanding of the multiple stress-responsive  
candidate genes. Further, this helped in the functional characterization of each gene  
that is involved in the stress signaling and tolerance mechanisms for abiotic and  
biotic stress adaptation. 
   Recently, Vemanna et al. (2019) reviewed comprehensive information on cross- 
talk signaling and multiple stress-tolerance mechanisms in rice. The overlapping  
stress-tolerance mechanisms and transcriptional responses in combined stresses are  
quite complex and interact with several biological processes. There are few reports  
on  a  meta-analysis  using  transcriptome  data,  and  they  found  certain  common  
genomic regions shared with multiple or individual stress tolerances. This indicates  
that, in response to stress tolerance, several hormonal signaling pathways are over- 
lapping and cross-talking. Interestingly, Zhang et al. (2016) identified a total of 178  
genes that were commonly expressed in drought and bacterial pathogen infections  
from the transcriptome analysis. However, some genes play specific functional and  
opposite roles in biotic and abiotic stresses. For example, one of the CDPK family  
proteins, OsCPK12, regulates drought, salinity, and cold stress tolerance, but it is a  
negative regulator for blast resistance (Asano et al. 2012; Fang et al. 2019). Similarly,  
the WRKY transcription factor family of WRKY71 is responsible for increasing the  
tolerance of bacterial infections, whereas the overexpression of WRKY45 showed  
susceptibility. Universal stress-tolerance proteins such as ABC transporters play a  
vital role in the development of stress tolerance in both biotic and abiotic stresses. 
   In the GSR breeding strategy, Murugaiyan et al. (2019) identified a robust QTL for  
arsenic tolerance on chromosome 1 and found a multi-drug resistance- associated pro- 
tein (OsMRP2), which belongs to the subfamily of ABC transporters. It is mainly  
involved in the vacuolar sequestration of toxic metabolites (Brunetti et al. 2015). In  
the GSR breeding program, we primarily focused on dissecting complex abiotic traits.  
The rice crop is susceptible to cold stress, which adversely affects the crop at various  

----------------------- Page 97-----------------------

84                                                                                                        J. Ali et al. 

growth stages, causing significant yield decreases mainly in temperate, tropical, and  
subtropical rice-growing regions. Similary, Najeeb et al. (2020) identified low-tem- 
perature stress-tolerance QTLs and found some promising genomic regions that were  
involved in the multiple stress-tolerance mechanism in rice. For instance, the major  
QTL on chromosome 5 had a possible candidate gene, Os05g49970, encoding trans- 
lation initiation factor-2 (eIF2). These genes are involved in several cellular and meta- 
bolic  processes  in  the  early  growth  developmental  stages,  hormonal  signaling  
pathways  in  plant  defense  mechanisms,  and  tolerance  of  various  abiotic  stresses  
(Martínez-Silva et al. 2012; Mutuku et al. 2015). Likewise, on chromosome 6, two  
genes (Os06g17220 and  Os06g48300) were involved in major ABA-dependent sig- 
naling pathways and were responsible for sucrose-synthetic activity during anoxia  
conditions (Lasanthi-Kudahettige et al.  2007; Bhatnagar et al. 2017). Zhang et al.  
(2011)  had  attempted  to  integrate  contemporary  knowledge  of  signal  transduction  
pathways with the principles of quantitative and population genetics to illustrate the  
genetic networks underlying complex traits using a model established upon the one- 
way functional dependency of downstream genes on upstream regulators depicting  
the principle of hierarchy. The mutual functional dependence among related genes  
was determined as the functional genetic units (FGUs). Interestingly, both simulated  
and  real  data  suggested  that  complementary  epistasis  contributes  significantly  to  
quantitative trait variation and obscures the phenotypic effects of many “downstream”  
loci in pathways. Downstream FGUs were more vulnerable to loss of function than  
their upstream regulators; however, this vulnerability was compensated by different  
FGUs of similar functions (Zhang et al. 2011). Dissecting the complex trait of nutri- 
ent-use efficiency under low-input conditions (Mahender et al. 2019) identified a key  
regulator as F-box protein and calcium-dependent protein kinase on chromosome 2.  
These genomic regions played a major role in carbon and nitrogen metabolism and  
also maintained the homeostatic coordination of other enzymatic activities. The inte- 
grated approaches of omics and gene network analysis could play a crucial role in  
understanding stress tolerance in combined or individual stress-tolerance mechanisms  
in rice. These strategies need to be assessed more to gain deeper insights into dissect- 
ing  the  complexity  and  expanding  the  knowledge  on  each  specific  role  of  stress- 
responsive genes and transcription factors. Placing all the outputs from these strategies  
together could help to understand the unique and shared molecular and physiological  
pathways and possibly increase the adaptation to multiple abiotic and biotic stress  
factors. 

4.2       Breeding Products Combining Tolerance   
          of Multiple Stresses 

Maintaining genetic diversity in breeding programs is a critical component, and it  
provides an excellent opportunity for breeders to develop novel and improved culti- 
vars with desirable target traits in their breeding program. The GSR breeding pro- 
gram  contains  two  interlinked  breeding  strategies:  selective  introgression  lines  

----------------------- Page 98-----------------------

Green Super Rice (GSR) Traits: Breeding and Genetics for Multiple Biotic and Abiotic…        85 

(SILs) and the designed QTL pyramiding (DQP) strategy. First is to develop multi-  
trait- specific SILs from several BC F  bulk populations derived from a few highly 1 2 
adapted recipient parents and 10–15 donor parents with three rounds of multiple-  
stress  screening.  This  results  in  the  development  of  EB-SILs,  and  these  high-  
yielding, multi-stress-tolerant BC F  SILs then undergo two seasons of preliminary 1 5 
yield trials and advanced yield trials to identify superior lines simultaneously across  
drought, low-input, and irrigated conditions. The superior SILs that outyield the  
standard checks under different conditions are shortlisted for global multi-location  
trials. Superior multi-trait-specific SILs are crossed with another IL with comple- 
mentary  traits  from  within  the  same  recipient/donor  combination  or  different  
donors. Such a designed cross based on genotypic and phenotypic information is  
referred to as a DQP approach. This has played a vital role in increasing grain yield,  
improving tolerance of abiotic and biotic stresses, and using fewer inputs such as  
fertilizer and pesticide. This breeding strategy began in 2008 at IRRI and was used  
to create breeding materials that involved 500 elite rice varieties that belong to the  
mini-core collection and are part of the 3000 Rice Genomes Project (Ali et al. 2012).  
Among these, only three recipient parents, Huanghuazhan (HHZ), Weed Tolerant  
Rice-1 (WTR-1), and TME80518, and 16 donors were fully used for the EBBP and  
DQP approach to identify promising GSR materials with multiple abiotic and biotic  
stress tolerance (Ali et  al.  2012,  2013b,  2018a) (Fig.  3). The  BC F  populations 1 2 
underwent  three  rounds  of  precise  phenotypic  screening  under  drought,  salinity,  
submergence,  low-chemical-input,  and  normal  irrigated  conditions.  This  led  to  
identifying 845 trait-specific SILs that outperformed the tolerant checks and these  
were  further  evaluated  under  multi-environment  locations  in  Asian  and  African  
countries. As of now, a total of 66 GSR breeding materials have been registered in  
China and 59 GSR breeding materials have been released across Asian and African  
countries  (Fig.  5).  More  than  90  GSR  rice  varieties  were  nominated  in  national  
cooperative yield trials from 2016 to 2018. The released varieties showed consis- 
tency in higher grain yield under low inputs (fertilizer and pesticide) and tolerance  
of multiple biotic and abiotic stresses. For instance, Yorobe et al. (2016) assessed  
the impact of GSR varieties and evaluated the income of farmer-users per hectare.  
Based on the survey data and fixed-effect model approach, farmer income increased  
significantly  compared  with  that  of  farmers  using  conventional  inbred  varieties  
(non-GSR materials) with the frequent occurrence of flood and submergence condi- 
tions (Yorobe et al.  2014; Kodama et al. 2019). In addition, the net farm income  
advantage with GSR is quite high under increasing percentiles of rainfall. Several  
GSR  varieties  outperformed  the  local  checks  (Table  2).  One  GSR  line  (IRIS  
179-880151) in data from two seasons for 2 years showed a 10% yield advantage  
vis-à-vis  the  local  check  variety  and  also  had  tolerance  of  drought,  salinity,  and  
submergence  (Ali  et  al.  2013a).  Similarly,  multiple-stress-tolerant  lines  such  as  
GSR  IR1-12-D10-S1-D1,  GSR  IR1-5-S10-D1-D1,  and  GSR  IR1-8-S12-Y2-D1  
performed well under different environments and had a higher grain yield advantage  
of 25% to 40% over the drought-tolerant checks (Marcaida III et al. 2014). Another  
recent example of the potential impact of GSR varietal performance is found in the  
sub-Saharan  African  region  of  Mozambique,  which  is  one  of  the  major  rice  

----------------------- Page 99-----------------------

86                                                                                           J. Ali et al. 

Fig. 5   Achievements of GSR breeding program and released GSR varieties across the globe. (a)  
Map showing the number of released GSR varieties highlighted country-wise. (b) In a span of  
6 years, the total number of GSR varieties released and nominated in national cooperative yield  
trials across Asia and Africa 

exporters. Kodama (2019) conducted a farm-level survey in three regions (Gaza,  
Sofala, and Nampula) and used an endogenous switching regression (ESR) model  
to assess GSR varieties among smallholder rice farmers and smallholder rice pro- 
ducers. Interestingly, smallholders carry out about 90% of the rice production in this  
region, and average yield is 1.0–1.2 t/ha in rainfed systems and 2.8–3.5 t/ha in nor- 
mal irrigated conditions. This region is more prone to abiotic stresses, and mainly to  
the variability and duration of rainfall. With the adoption of GSR varieties, Kodama  
(2019) noticed a significant yield advantage, about ten times higher for smallholder  
farmers than for smallholder rice producers adopting non-GSR varieties. This indi- 
cates  the  strong  and  positive  yield  advantage  and  tolerance  of  multiple  stresses  
across Asian and African countries that benefit poor farmers’ income. This provides  
a great opportunity for GSR varieties to provide more rice and help alleviate poverty  
across the major rice-growing countries. 

----------------------- Page 100-----------------------

Green Super Rice (GSR) Traits: Breeding and Genetics for Multiple Biotic and Abiotic…                          87 

4.3      Development of Rice Hybrids   
         with Multiple-Stress Tolerance 

Hybrid rice breeding is one of the major core components for ensuring global food  
security. From a historical perspective, two milestones have been reached in enhanc- 
ing grain yield. The first was by developing semi-dwarf rice varieties through the  
incorporation of the semi-dwarf (sd1) gene in rice breeding at IRRI in the early  
1960s and the second was by the use of heterosis in hybrid rice (Yuan 2017). The  
potential of these two strategies was shown by rice grain yield increasing by about  
30% with the semi-dwarf gene and a 15–20% yield increase with the use of hetero- 
sis in the major rice-producing areas of China (Peng et al. 2009). Currently, there  
are  three  approaches  for  increasing  hybrid  vigor:  the  cytoplasmic  male  sterility/ 
fertility restoration (CMS/Rf) locus, environment-sensitive genic male sterility, and  
apomixis (Birchler et al. 2006; Bar-Zvi et al. 2017; Xie et al. 2019). At IRRI, we  
began developing climate-smart rice hybrids by adopting EB-SILs and using the  
DQP approach in separate restorer and maintainer backgrounds (Ali et al.  2020).  
The promising rice varieties that are tolerant of multiple stresses and possess higher  
grain yield and superior grain quality traits were considered for parental selection  
based on the fertility restoration locus and possession of desirable floral character- 
istics. Based on genotyping results, the GSR lines positive for fertility restoration  
loci Rf3 and Rf4 will be considered as restorers and those entirely negative for those  
loci as maintainers. More than 100 restorer lines with a strong general combining  
ability, tolerance of multiple stresses, and having preferable grain quality have been  
bred from using the promising lines from the GSR breeding program. These climate-  
smart parental lines are essential for complementing the introgression of QTLs and  
genes with green traits into the F s. Hybrid rice-related traits governing wide com-1 
patibility, floral traits that promote outcrossing, and seed reproducibility are impor- 
tant for parental line-breeding besides addressing the market requirements of the  
target  regions.  Further,  by  selecting  the  maximum  genetic  distance  between  the  
parental lines from diverse heterotic pools, this helped to identify promising high-  
yielding  climate-resilient  hybrid  rice  combinations.  Recently,  genomic  hybrid  
breeding has emerged using whole-genome markers to predict future hybrids. Only  
the  superior  predicted  hybrids  are  then  field-evaluated  and  later  released  as  new  
hybrid  cultivars  based  on  their  actual  performance  in  the  target  conditions. This  
approach offers an opportunity to select truly superior hybrids at limited cost. Cui  
et al. (2019) used genomic best linear unbiased prediction to predict hybrid perfor- 
mance using an existing rice population of 1495 hybrids. Further, a replicated ten- 
fold  cross-validation  showed  that  the  prediction  ability  on  ten  agronomic  traits  
ranged  from  0.35  to  0.92  (Cui  et  al.  2019).  By  keeping  this  population  of  1495  
hybrids, it can be used to predict hybrids from seemingly unrelated parents. Machine  
learning algorithms and artificial intelligence are also being employed for predict- 
ing the best hybrid combinations at IRRI using genomic and historical hybrid yield  
trial data. 

----------------------- Page 101-----------------------

88                                                                                             J. Ali et al. 

5      Conclusions 

Identifying the promising genomic regions of QTLs and genes that are associated  
with the green traits that are involved in multiple-stress tolerance mechanisms will  
be adapted to increase rice yield in the future. The Green Super Rice breeding strat- 
egy using EB-SILs and DQP, along with combined advanced genomic technologies,  
significantly improved the development of rice varieties with multiple-stress toler- 
ance. This breeding strategy also helped to identify promising QTLs and genes that  
were associated with the green traits related to higher grain yield, tolerance of abi- 
otic and biotic stresses, low-input use of fertilizer and pesticide, and superior grain  
quality. These resource-saving and environment-friendly features have been well  
exploited  under  the  GSR  breeding  strategy.  The  stress-tolerance  mechanism  of  
these combined or individual stresses that triggers a network of signaling pathways  
at the plant cell level needs to be studied in detail. The crosstalk of these biotic and  
abiotic stresses could reveal similar pathways for maintaining the cellular mecha- 
nism for tolerance. Omics approaches should occupy the core component in breed- 
ing and trait development activities for identifying multiple-stress tolerance, and  
this would remain the primary target trait in the next generation of crop breeding  
programs. 

References 

Aghamolki  MTK, Yusop  MK,  Oad  FC  et  al  (2014)  Heat  stress  effects  on  yield  parameters  of  
    selected rice cultivars at reproductive growth stages. J Food Agric Environ 12:741–746 
Agrios GN (2005) Plant pathology, 5th edn. Elsevier Academic Press, Burlington, pp 79–103 
Ali AJ, Xu JL, Ismail AM et al (2006) Hidden diversity for abiotic and biotic stress tolerances in  
    the primary gene pool of rice revealed by a large backcross breeding program. Field Crops Res  
    97:66–76 
Ali J, Xu JL, Gao YM et al (2012) Green super rice (GSR) technology: an innovative breeding  
    strategy-achievements & advances. In: The 12th SABRAO congress on plant breeding towards  
    2025: challenges in a rapidly changing world. Chiang Mai, Thailand. pp 16–17 
Ali J, Xu JL, Gao YM et al (2013a) Breeding for yield potential and enhanced productivity across  
    different rice ecologies through green super rice (GSR) breeding strategy. In: Muralidharan K,  
    Siddiq EA (eds) International dialogue on perception and prospects of designer rice. Society  
    for Advancement of Rice Research, Hyderabad, pp 60–68 
Ali N, Paul S, Gayen D et al (2013b) RNAi mediated down regulation of myo-inositol-3-phosphate  
    synthase to generate low phytate rice. Rice 6:12. https://doi.org/10.1186/1939- 8433- 6- 12 
Ali J, Xu J-L, Gao Y-M et al (2017) Harnessing the hidden genetic diversity for improving mul- 
    tiple  abiotic  stress  tolerance  in  rice  (Oryza  sativa  L.).  PLoS  One  12:e0172515.  https://doi. 
    org/10.1371/journal.pone.0172515 
Ali J, Aslam UM, Tariq R et al (2018a) Exploiting the genomic diversity of rice (Oryza sativa L.):  
    SNP-typing in 11 early-backcross introgression-breeding populations. Front Plant Sci 9:1–10.  
    https://doi.org/10.3389/fpls.2018.00849 
Ali J, Jewel ZA, Mahender A et al (2018b) Molecular genetics and breeding for nutrient use effi- 
    ciency in rice. Int J Mol Sci 19:1762. https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms19061762 

----------------------- Page 102-----------------------

Green Super Rice (GSR) Traits: Breeding and Genetics for Multiple Biotic and Abiotic…                 89 

Ali  J,  Mahender  A,  Prahalada  GD  et  al  (2020)  Genomics-assisted  breeding  of  climate-smart  
    inbred  and  hybrid  rice  varieties.  In:  Kole  C  (ed)  Genomic  designing  of  climate-smart  
    cereal   crops.   Springer,   Cham,   Springer   Nature   Switzerland  AG,   pp   1–43.  https://doi. 
    org/10.1007/978-3-319-93381-8_1 
Anderson PK, Cunningham AA, Patel NG et al (2004) Emerging infectious diseases of plants:  
    pathogen pollution, climate change and agrotechnology drivers. Trends Ecol Evol 19:535–544 
Antralina M, Istina IN, Simarmata T (2015) Effect of difference weed control methods to yield of  
    lowland rice in the SOBARI. Procedia Food Sci 3:323–329 
Appleby AP, Müller F, Carpy S (2002) Weed control. Ullmann’s encyclopedia of industrial chem- 
    istry. Wiley, Weinheim 
Asano T, Hayashi N, Kobayashi M et al (2012) A rice calcium-dependent protein kinase OsCPK12  
    oppositely modulates salt-stress tolerance and blast disease resistance. Plant J 69:26–36 
Ashkani S, Rafii MY, Shabanimofrad M et al (2015) Molecular breeding strategy and challenges  
    towards improvement of blast disease resistance in rice crop. Front Plant Sci 6:886 
Bahuguna RN, Gupta P, Bagri J et al (2018) Forward and reverse genetics approaches for com- 
    bined stress tolerance in rice. Indian J Plant Physiol 23:630–646 
Bailey-Serres J, Fukao T, Ronald P et al (2010) Submergence tolerant rice: SUB1’s journey from  
    landrace to modern cultivar. Rice 3:138–147 
Balachiranjeevi  CH,  Prahalada  GD,  Mahender A  et  al  (2019)  Identification  of  a  novel  locus,  
    BPH38 (t), conferring resistance to brown planthopper (Nilaparvata lugens Stal.) using early  
    backcross population in rice (Oryza sativa L.). Euphytica 215:185 
Balakrishnan  D,  Subrahmanyam  D,  Badri  J  et  al  (2016)  Genotype  ×  environment  interactions  
    of yield traits in backcross introgression lines derived from  Oryza sativa cv. Swarna/Oryza  
    nivara. Front Plant Sci 7:1–19. https://doi.org/10.3389/fpls.2016.01530 
Balyan HS, Gupta PK, Kumar S et al (2013) Genetic improvement of grain protein content and  
    other health-related constituents of wheat grain. Plant Breed 132:446–457 
Bar-Zvi D, Lupo O, Levy AA, Barkai N (2017) Hybrid vigor: the best of both parents, or a genomic  
    clash? Curr Opin Syst Biol 6:22–27 
Bazrkar-Khatibani L, Fakheri BA, Hosseini-Chaleshtori M et al (2019) Genetic mapping and vali- 
    dation of quantitative trait loci (QTL) for the grain appearance and quality traits in rice (Oryza  
    sativa L.) by using recombinant inbred line (RIL) population. Int J Genomics 2019:3160275.  
    https://doi.org/10.1155/2019/3160275 
Bernier J, Kumar A, Ramaiah V et al (2007) A large effect QTL for grain yield under reproductive-  
    stage  drought    stress  in  upland    rice.  Crop   Sci   47:507–516.    https://doi.org/10.2135/ 
    cropsci2006.07.0495 
Bhandari A, Jayaswal P, Yadav N et al (2019) Genomics-assisted backcross breeding for infus- 
    ing climate resilience in high-yielding green revolution varieties of rice. Indian J Genet 79(1  
    Suppl):160–170 
Bhatnagar  N,  Min  M-K,  Choi  E-H  et  al  (2017)  The  protein  phosphatase  2C  clade A  protein  
    OsPP2C51 positively regulates seed germination by directly inactivating OsbZIP10. Plant Mol  
    Biol 93:389–401 
Birchler JA, Yao H, Chudalayandi S (2006) Unraveling the genetic basis of hybrid vigor. Proc Natl  
    Acad Sci U S A 103:12957–12958 
Brunetti P, Zanella L, De Paolis A et al (2015) Cadmium-inducible expression of the ABC-type  
    transporter AtABCC3 increases phytochelatin-mediated cadmium tolerance in Arabidopsis . J  
    Exp Bot 66(13):3815–3829. https://doi.org/10.1093/jxb/erv185 
Calayugan MIC, Formantes AK, Amparado A et al (2020) Genetic analysis of agronomic traits  
    and grain iron and zinc concentrations in a doubled haploid population of rice (Oryza sativa  
    L.). Sci Rep 10:1–14 
Chauhan  BS, Abugho  SB  (2013) Weed  management  in  mechanized-sown,  zero-till  dry-seeded  
    rice. Weed Technol 27:28–33 
Chauhan BS, Awan TH, Abugho SB, Evengelista G (2015a) Effect of crop establishment methods  
    and weed control treatments on weed management, and rice yield. Field Crops Res 172:72–84 

----------------------- Page 103-----------------------

90                                                                                              J. Ali et al. 

Chauhan BS, Opeña J, Ali J et al (2015b) Response of 10 elite “Green Super Rice” genotypes to  
    weed infestation in aerobic rice systems. Plant Prod Sci 18:228–233. https://doi.org/10.1626/ 
    pps.18.228 
Chen  S, Yang Y,  Shi W  et  al  (2008)  Badh2,  encoding  betaine  aldehyde  dehydrogenase,  inhib- 
    its the biosynthesis of 2-acetyl-1-pyrroline, a major component in rice fragrance. Plant Cell  
    20(7):1850–1861 
Chen X, Cui Z, Fan M et al (2014a) Producing more grain with lower environmental costs. Nature  
    514:486–489 
Chen L, Lin L, Cai G et al (2014b) Identification of nitrogen, phosphorus, and potassium deficien- 
    cies in rice based on static scanning technology and hierarchical identification method. PLoS  
    One 9:e113200. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0113200 
Cheng SH, Zhuang JY, Fan YY et al (2007) Progress in research and development on hybrid rice:  
    a super-domesticate in China. Ann Bot 100:959–966 
Cohen SP, Leach JE (2019) Abiotic and biotic stresses induce a core transcriptome response in  
    rice. Sci Rep 9:1–11 
Cuevas RP, Pede VO, McKinley J et al (2016) Rice grain quality and consumer preferences: a case  
    study of two rural towns in the Philippines. PLoS One 11:e0150345 
Cui K, Peng S, Xing Y et al (2002) Molecular dissection of seedling-vigor and associated physi- 
    ological traits in rice. Theor Appl Genet 105:745–753 
Cui Y, Li R, Li G et al (2019) Hybrid breeding of rice via genomic selection. Plant Biotechnol J  
    18:57–67 
Custodio MC, Cuevas RP, Ynion J et al (2019) Rice quality: how is it defined by consumers, indus- 
    try, food scientists, and geneticists? Trends Food Sci Technol 92:122–137 
da Cruz RP, Sperotto RA, Cargnelutti D et al (2013) Avoiding damage and achieving cold toler- 
    ance in rice plants. Food Energy Secur 2:96–119. https://doi.org/10.1002/fes3.25 
Dang X, Thi TGT, Dong G et al (2014) Genetic diversity and association mapping of seed vigor in  
    rice (Oryza sativa L.). Planta 239:1309–1319 
Dimaano NGB, Ali J, Cruz PCSS et al (2017) Performance of newly developed weed-competitive  
    rice cultivars under lowland and upland weedy conditions. Weed Sci 65:798–817. https://doi. 
    org/10.1017/wsc.2017.57 
Dimaano  NGB, Ali  J,  Mahender A  et  al  (2020)  Identification  of  quantitative  trait  loci  govern- 
    ing  early  germination  and  seedling  vigor  traits  related  to  weed  competitive  ability  in  rice.  
    Euphytica 216:159. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10681- 020- 02694- 8 
Diwan J, Channbyregowda M, Shenoy V et al (2013) Molecular mapping of early vigour related  
    QTLs in rice. Res J Biol 1:24–30 
Dixit S, Singh A, Cruz MTS et al (2014) Multiple major QTL lead to stable yield performance of  
    rice cultivars across varying drought intensities. BMC Genet 15:16 
Dixit S, Singh A, Sandhu N et al (2017) Combining drought and submergence tolerance in rice:  
    marker-assisted breeding and QTL combination effects. Mol Breed 37:143 
Du B, Chen R, Guo J, He G (2020) Current understanding of the genomic, genetic, and molecular  
    control of insect resistance in rice. Mol Breed 40:24 
Elferink M, Schierhorn F (2016) Global demand for food is rising. Can we meet it? Harv Bus  
    Rev 7:2016 
Ella ES, Kawano N, Osamu H (2003) Importance of active oxygen scavenging system in the recov- 
    ery of rice seedlings after submergence. Plant Sci 165:85–93 
Fahad S, Bajwa AA, Nazir U et al (2017) Crop production under drought and heat stress: plant  
    responses and management options. Front Plant Sci 8:1147 
Fahad S, Adnan M, Noor M et al (2019) Major constraints for global rice production. In: Advances  
    in rice research for abiotic stress tolerance. Elsevier, Amsterdam, pp 1–22 
Fang WB, Yong CL, Hua CS et al (2019) Impaired function of the calcium-dependent protein  
    kinase, OsCPK12, leads to early senescence in rice (Oryza sativa L.). Front Plant Sci 10:52 
Farooq M, Siddique KHM, Rehman H et al (2011) Rice direct seeding: experiences, challenges  
    and opportunities. Soil Tillage Res 111:87–98 

----------------------- Page 104-----------------------

Green Super Rice (GSR) Traits: Breeding and Genetics for Multiple Biotic and Abiotic…                    91 

Feng B, Chen K, Cui Y et al (2018) Genetic dissection and simultaneous improvement of drought  
    and low nitrogen tolerances by designed QTL pyramiding in rice. Front Plant Sci 9:306. https:// 
    doi.org/10.3389/fpls.2018.00306 
Fischer RA, Edmeades GO (2010) Breeding and cereal yield progress. Crop Sci 50:S-85 
Foolad MR, Subbiah P, Zhang L (2007) Common QTL affect the rate of tomato seed germination  
    under different stress and nonstress conditions. Int J Plant Genomics 2007:97386. https://doi. 
    org/10.1155/2007/97386 
Gao Z, Zeng D, Cheng F et al (2011) ALK, the key gene for gelatinization temperature, is a modi- 
    fier gene for gel consistency in rice. J Integr Plant Biol 53:756–765 
Gautam T, Saripalli G, Kumar A et al (2020) Introgression of a drought insensitive grain yield  
    QTL  for  improvement  of  four  Indian  bread  wheat  cultivars  using  marker  assisted  breeding  
    without background selection. J Plant Biochem Biotechnol 29:1–12. https://doi.org/10.1007/ 
    s13562-020-00553-0 
Ghimire KH, Quiatchon LA, Vikram P et al (2012) Identification and mapping of a QTL (qDTY1.1)  
    with a consistent effect on grain yield under drought. Field Crops Res 131:88–96 
Gimhani DR, Gregorio GB, Kottearachchi NS, Samarasinghe WLG (2016) SNP-based discovery  
    of salinity-tolerant QTLs in a bi-parental population of rice (Oryza sativa). Mol Gen Genomics  
    291:2081–2099 
Gothandam KM, Kim E-S, Cho H, Chung Y-Y (2005) OsPPR1, a pentatricopeptide repeat protein  
    of rice, is essential for the chloroplast biogenesis. Plant Mol Biol 58:421–433 
Guan YS, Serraj R, Liu SH et al (2010) Simultaneously improving yield under drought stress and  
    non-stress conditions: a case study of rice (Oryza sativa L.). J Exp Bot 61:4145–4156. https:// 
    doi.org/10.1093/jxb/erq212 
Guo L, Gao Z, Qian Q (2014) Application of resequencing to rice genomics, functional genomics  
    and evolutionary analysis. Rice 7:4. https://doi.org/10.1186/s12284- 014- 0004- 7 
Guo J, Hu X, Gao L et al (2017) The rice production practices of high yield and high nitrogen use  
    efficiency in Jiangsu, China. Sci Rep 7:2101 
Guojun P, Shuqiang C, Chengyan S et al (2009) Study on relationship between resistance to blast  
    and yield traits in early japonica rice in cold region [J]. Chin Agric Sci Bull 19 
Hawkesford  MJ,  Griffiths  S  (2019)  Exploiting  genetic  variation  in  nitrogen  use  efficiency  for  
    cereal crop improvement. Curr Opin Plant Biol 49:35–42 
Huang  XS,  Luo  T,  Fu  XZ  et  al  (2011)  Cloning  and  molecular  characterization  of  a  mitogen-  
    activated  protein  kinase  gene  from  Poncirus  trifoliata  whose  ectopic  expression  confers  
    dehydration/drought  tolerance  in  transgenic  tobacco.  J  Exp  Bot  62:5191–5206.  https://doi. 
    org/10.1093/jxb/err229 
Jabran  K,  Chauhan  BS  (2015)  Weed  management  in  aerobic  rice  systems.  Crop  Prot  
    78:151–163 
Jena KK, Kim SM, Suh JP, Kim YG (2010) Development of cold-tolerant breeding lines using  
    QTL analysis in rice. Second Africa Rice Congr 22–26 
Jewel  Z, Ali  J,  Pang Y  et  al  (2018)  Developing  Green  Super  Rice  varieties  with  high  nutrient  
    use efficiency by phenotypic selection under varied nutrient conditions. Crop J 7(3):368–377.  
    https://doi.org/10.20944/preprints201807.0216.v1 
Jewel ZA, Ali J, Mahender A et al (2019) Identification of quantitative trait loci associated with  
    nutrient  use  efficiency  traits,  using  SNP  markers  in  an  early  backcross  population  of  rice  
    (Oryza sativa L.). Int J Mol Sci 20:900. https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms20040900 
Ji Z, Yang S, Zeng Y et al (2016) Pyramiding blast, bacterial blight and brown planthopper resis- 
    tance genes in rice restorer lines. J Integr Agric 15:1432–1440 
Kavurikalpana TS, Shashidhara N (2018) Validation of molecular markers linked to grain quality  
    traits in rice (Oryza sativa L.). Int J Curr Microbiol Appl Sci 7:1897–1902 
Khan FA, Narayan S, Bhat SA, Maqbool R (2016) Vermipriming: a noble technology for seed  
    invigouration in rice (Oryza sativa L.). SKUAST J Res 18:124–129 

----------------------- Page 105-----------------------

92                                                                                             J. Ali et al. 

Kissoudis C, van de Wiel C, Visser RGF, van der Linden G (2014) Enhancing crop resilience to  
    combined abiotic and biotic stress through the dissection of physiological and molecular cross- 
    talk. Front Plant Sci 5:207 
Kodama W, Pede VO, Mishra AK, Cabrera ER (2019) Assessing the benefits of Green Super Rice  
    in Sub-Saharan Africa: evidence from Mozambique. Selected paper prepared for presentation  
    at the 2019 Agricultural & Applied Economics Association Annual Meeting, Atlanta, Georgia,  
    July 21–23. 23 p 
Kreuzwieser J, Gessler A (2010) Global climate change and tree nutrition: influence of water avail- 
    ability. Tree Physiol 30:1221–1234 
Kumar  A,  Dixit  S,  Ram  T  et  al  (2014)  Breeding  high-yielding  drought-tolerant  rice:  genetic  
    variations and conventional and molecular approaches. J Exp Bot 65:6265–6278. https://doi. 
    org/10.1093/jxb/eru363 
Kumar A, Sandhu N, Yadav S et al (2017a) Rice varietal development to meet future challenges.  
    In: The future rice strategy for India. Elsevier, Amsterdam, pp 161–220 
Kumar M, Gho Y-S, Jung K-H, Kim S-R (2017b) Genome-wide identification and analysis of  
    genes, conserved between japonica and indica rice cultivars, that respond to low-temperature  
    stress at the vegetative growth stage. Front Plant Sci 8:1120 
Kumar A, Sandhu N, Dixit S et al (2018) Marker-assisted selection strategy to pyramid two or  
    more QTLs for quantitative trait-grain yield under drought. Rice (N Y) 11:35 
Kumar A, Sandhu N, Venkateshwarlu C et al (2020) Development of introgression lines in  
    high  yielding,  semi-dwarf  genetic  backgrounds  to  enable  improvement  of  modern  rice  
    varieties for tolerance to multiple abiotic stresses free from undesirable linkage drag. Sci  
    Rep 10:1–13 
Lafitte HR, Li ZK, Vijayakumar CHM et al (2006) Improvement of rice drought tolerance through  
    backcross breeding: evaluation of donors and selection in drought nurseries. Field Crops Res  
    97:77–86. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fcr.2005.08.017 
Lasanthi-Kudahettige R, Magneschi L, Loreti E et al (2007) Transcript profiling of the anoxic rice  
    coleoptile. Plant Physiol 144:218–231 
Le Nguyen K, Grondin A, Courtois B, Gantet P (2019) Next-generation sequencing accelerates  
    crop gene discovery. Trends Plant Sci 24:263–274 
Li Z (1998) Molecular analysis of epistasis affecting complex traits. In: Molecular dissection of  
    complex traits. CRC Press, Boca Raton, pp 119–130 
Li Z, Ali J (2017) Breeding green super rice (GSR) varieties for sustainable rice cultivation. In:  
    Sasaki T (ed) Achieving sustainable cultivation of rice, vol 1 edn. Burleigh Dodds Science  
    Publishing, Cambridge, pp 131–152 
Li ZK, Fu BY, Gao YM et al (2005) Genome-wide introgression lines and their use in genetic  
    and  molecular  dissection  of  complex  phenotypes  in  rice  (Oryza  sativa  L.).  Plant  Mol  Biol  
    59:33–52. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11103- 005- 8519- 3 
Li S, Tian Y, Wu K et al (2018) Modulating plant growth–metabolism coordination for sustainable  
    agriculture. Nature 560:595. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586- 018- 0415- 5 
Liang Y, Meng L, Lin X et al (2018) QTL and QTL networks for cold tolerance at the reproductive  
    stage detected using selective introgression in rice. PLoS One 13:e0200846 
Liu C, Ding S, Zhang A et al (2020) Development of nutritious rice with high zinc/selenium and  
    low cadmium in grains through QTL pyramiding. J Integr Plant Biol 62:349–359 
Mahender A, Anandan A, Pradhan SK (2015) Early seedling vigour, an imperative trait for direct-  
    seeded rice: an overview on physio-morphological parameters and molecular markers. Planta  
    241:1027–1050 
Mahender A, Anandan A,  Pradhan  SK,  Pandit  E  (2016)  Rice  grain  nutritional  traits  and  their  
    enhancement  using  relevant  genes  and  QTLs  through  advanced  approaches.  Springerplus  
    5(1):2086. https://doi.org/10.1186/s40064- 016- 3744- 6 

----------------------- Page 106-----------------------

Green Super Rice (GSR) Traits: Breeding and Genetics for Multiple Biotic and Abiotic…                    93 

Mahender A, Ali J, Prahalada GD et al (2019) Genetic dissection of developmental responses of  
    agro-morphological traits under different doses of nutrient fertilizers using high-density SNP  
    markers. PLoS One 14(7):e0220066 
Marcaida M III, Li T, Angeles O et al (2014) Biomass accumulation and partitioning of newly  
    developed  Green  Super  Rice  (GSR)  cultivars  under  drought  stress  during  the  reproductive  
    stage. Field Crops Res 162:30–38. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fcr.2014.03.013 
Martínez-Silva AV, Aguirre-Martínez C, Flores-Tinoco CE et al (2012) Translation initiation fac- 
    tor AteIF(iso)4E is involved in selective mRNA translation in Arabidopsis thaliana seedlings.  
    PLoS One 7(2):e31606. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0031606 
Matsushima K-I, Sakagami J-I (2013) Effects of seed hydropriming on germination and seedling  
    vigor during emergence of rice under different soil moisture conditions. Am J Plant Sci 4:1584.  
    https://doi.org/10.4236/ajps.2013.48191 
Matthus E, Wu LB, Ueda Y et al (2015) Loci, genes, and mechanisms associated with tolerance to  
    ferrous iron toxicity in rice (Oryza sativa L.). Theor Appl Genet 128:2085–2098. https://doi. 
    org/10.1007/s00122- 015- 2569- y 
Mehta S, Singh B, Dhakate P et al (2019) Rice, marker-assisted breeding, and disease resistance.  
    In: Wani SH (ed) Disease resistance in crop plants. Springer, Cham, pp 83–111 
Mogga M, Sibiya J, Shimelis H et al (2018) Diversity analysis and genome-wide association stud- 
    ies of grain shape and eating quality traits in rice (Oryza sativa L.) using DArT markers. PLoS  
    One 13:e0198012 
Molla KA, Debnath AB, Ganie SA, Mondal TK (2015) Identification and analysis of novel salt  
    responsive  candidate  gene  based  SSRs  (cgSSRs)  from  rice  (Oryza  sativa  L.).  BMC  Plant  
    Biol 15:122 
Mukamuhirwa A, Persson Hovmalm H, Bolinsson H et al (2019) Concurrent drought and tem- 
    perature  stress  in  rice—a  possible  result  of  the  predicted  climate  change:  effects  on  yield  
    attributes, eating characteristics, and health promoting compounds. Int J Environ Res Public  
    Health 16:1043 
Murugaiyan V, Ali J, Mahender A et al (2019) Mapping of genomic regions associated with arsenic  
    toxicity stress in a backcross breeding populations of rice (Oryza sativa L.). Rice 12:61 
Muthu V, Abbai R, Nallathambi J et al (2020) Pyramiding QTLs controlling tolerance against drought,  
    salinity, and submergence in rice through marker assisted breeding. PLoS One 15:e0227421 
Mutuku JM, Yoshida S, Shimizu T et al (2015) The WRKY45-dependent signaling pathway is  
    required for resistance against Striga hermonthica parasitism. Plant Physiol 168:1152–1163 
Najeeb S, Ali J, Mahender A et al (2020) Identification of main-effect quantitative trait loci (QTLs)  
    for low-temperature stress tolerance germination- and early seedling vigor-related traits in rice  
    (Oryza sativa L.). Mol Breed 40:10 
Nandi S, Subudhi PK, Senadhira D et al (1997) Mapping QTLs for submergence tolerance in rice  
    by AFLP analysis and selective genotyping. Mol Gen Genet 255(1):1–8 
Oladosu Y, Rafii MY, Samuel C et al (2019) Drought resistance in rice from conventional to molecu- 
    lar breeding: a review. Int J Mol Sci 20:3519. https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms20143519 
Oliver SN, Dennis ES, Dolferus R (2007) ABA regulates apoplastic sugar transport and is a poten- 
    tial signal for cold-induced pollen sterility in rice. Plant Cell Physiol 48:1319–1330 
Ouk M, Basnayake J, Tsubo M et al (2006) Use of drought response index for identification of  
    drought tolerant genotypes in rainfed lowland rice. Field Crops Res 99:48–58 
Panda BB, Sharma S, Mohapatra PK, Das A (2012) Application of excess nitrogen, phosphorus,  
    and potassium fertilizers leads to lowering of grain iron content in high-yielding tropical rice.  
    Commun Soil Sci Plant Anal 43:2590–2602 
Pandey P, Irulappan V, Bagavathiannan MV, Senthil-Kumar M (2017) Impact of combined abiotic  
    and biotic stresses on plant growth and avenues for crop improvement by exploiting physio-  
    morphological traits. Front Plant Sci 8:537 

----------------------- Page 107-----------------------

94                                                                                             J. Ali et al. 

Pang Y, Ali J, Wang X et al (2016) Relationship of rice grain amylose, gelatinization temperature  
    and pasting properties for breeding better eating and cooking quality of rice varieties. PLoS  
    One 11:e0168483 
Pang Y, Chen K, Wang X et al (2017a) Recurrent selection breeding by dominant male sterility  
    for multiple abiotic stresses tolerant rice cultivars. Euphytica 213:268. https://doi.org/10.1007/ 
    s10681- 017- 2055- 5 
Pang Y, Chen K, Wang X et al (2017b) Simultaneous improvement and genetic dissection of salt  
    tolerance  of  rice  (Oryza  sativa  L.)  by  designed  QTL  pyramiding.  Front  Plant  Sci  8:1275.  
    https://doi.org/10.3389/fpls.2017.01275 
Peng S, Tang Q, Zou Y (2009) Current status and challenges of rice production in China. Plant  
    Prod Sci 12:3–8 
Pradhan A, Naik N, Sahoo KK (2015) RNAi mediated drought and salinity stress tolerance in  
    plants. Am J Plant Sci 6:1990 
Rahman KM, Zhang D (2018) Effects of fertilizer broadcasting on the excessive use of inorganic  
    fertilizers and environmental sustainability. Sustainability 10:759 
Rahman M, Juraimi AS, Suria J et al (2012) Response of weed flora to different herbicides in  
    aerobic rice system. Sci Res Essays 7:12–23 
Rahman MA, Bimpong IK, Bizimana JB et al (2017) Mapping QTLs using a novel source of  
    salinity tolerance from Hasawi and their interaction with environments in rice. Rice 10(1):47.  
    https://doi.org/10.1186/s12284- 017- 0186- x 
Raj SK, Syriac EK (2017) Weed management in direct seeded rice: a review. Agric Rev 38:41–50.  
    https://doi.org/10.18805/ag.v0iOF.7307 
Ranawake AL, Manangkil OE, Yoshida S et al (2014) Mapping QTLs for cold tolerance at ger- 
    mination and the early seedling stage in rice (Oryza sativa L.). Biotechnol Biotechnol Equip  
    28:989–998. https://doi.org/10.1080/13102818.2014.978539 
Ray DK, Mueller ND, West PC, Foley JA (2013) Yield trends are insufficient to double global crop  
    production by 2050. PLoS One 8:e66428 
Ray DK, Gerber JS, MacDonald GK, West PC (2015) Climate variation explains a third of global  
    crop yield variability. Nat Commun 6:1–9 
Roy-Barman S, Chattoo BB (2005) Rice blast fungus sequenced. Curr Sci 89:930 
Sahebi M, Hanafi MM, Rafii MY et al (2018) Improvement of drought tolerance in rice (Oryza  
    sativa L.): genetics, genomic tools, and the WRKY gene family. Biomed Res Int 2018:3158474 
Saika H, Oikawa A, Matsuda F et al (2011) Application of gene targeting to designed mutation  
    breeding of high-tryptophan rice. Plant Physiol 156:1269–1277 
Saikumar S, Varma CMK, Saiharini A et al (2016) Grain yield responses to varied level of moisture  
    stress at reproductive stage in an interspecific population derived from Swarna/O. glaberrima  
    introgression line. NJAS Wageningen J Life Sci 78:111–122 
Sandhu N, Kumar A (2017) Bridging the rice yield gaps under drought: QTLs, genes, and their use  
    in breeding programs. Agronomy 7:27. https://doi.org/10.3390/agronomy7020027 
Schläppi MR, Jackson AK, Eizenga GC et al (2017) Assessment of five chilling tolerance traits and  
    GWAS mapping in rice using the USDA mini-core collection. Front Plant Sci 8:957. https:// 
    doi.org/10.3389/fpls.2017.00957 
Septiningsih EM, Pamplona AM, Sanchez DL et al (2009) Development of submergence-tolerant  
    rice cultivars: the Sub1 locus and beyond. Ann Bot 103(2):151–160 
Serrano-Mislata A, Bencivenga S, Bush M et al (2017) DELLA genes restrict inflorescence meri- 
    stem function independently of plant height. Nat Plants 3:749 
Shakiba E, Edwards JD, Jodari F et al (2017) Genetic architecture of cold tolerance in rice (Oryza  
    sativa) determined through high resolution genome-wide analysis. PLoS One 12:1–22. https:// 
    doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0172133 
Sharma M, Pandey GK (2016) Expansion and function of repeat domain proteins during stress and  
    development in plants. Front Plant Sci 6:1218 
Shinada H, Iwata N, Sato T, Fujino K (2014) QTL pyramiding for improving of cold tolerance at  
    fertilization stage in rice. Breed Sci 63:483–488. https://doi.org/10.1270/jsbbs.63.483 

----------------------- Page 108-----------------------

Green Super Rice (GSR) Traits: Breeding and Genetics for Multiple Biotic and Abiotic…                   95 

Shirasawa K, Takeuchi Y, Ebitani T et al (2008) Identification of gene for rice (Oryza sativa) seed  
    lipoxygenase-3 involved in the generation of stale flavor and development of SNP markers for  
    lipoxygenase-3 deficiency. Breed Sci 58(2):169–176 
Shrivastava P, Kumar R (2015) Soil salinity: a serious environmental issue and plant growth pro- 
    moting bacteria as one of the tools for its alleviation. Saudi J Biol Sci 22:123–131 
Singh K, Kumar V, Saharawat YS et al (2013) Weedy rice: an emerging threat for direct-seeded rice  
    production systems in India. J Rice Res 1:1–6. (open access) 
Singh H, Jassal RK, Kang JS et al (2015) Seed priming techniques in field crops: a review. Agric  
    Rev 36:251–264 
Singh R, Singh Y, Xalaxo S et al (2016) From QTL to variety-harnessing the benefits of QTLs for  
    drought, flood and salt tolerance in mega rice varieties of India through a multi-institutional  
    network. Plant Sci 242:278–287 
Sripongpangkul K, Posa GBT, Senadhira DW et al (2000) Genes/QTLs affecting flood tolerance  
    in rice. Theor Appl Genet 101(7):1074–1081 
Sui B, Feng X, Tian G et al (2013) Optimizing nitrogen supply increases rice yield and nitrogen  
    use efficiency by regulating yield formation factors. Field Crops Res 150:99–107 
Sun J, Yang L, Wang J et al (2018) Identification of a cold-tolerant locus in rice (Oryza sativa L.)  
    using bulked segregant analysis with a next-generation sequencing strategy. Rice 11:24 
Suprihatno B, Coffman WR (1981) Inheritance of submergence tolerance in rice (Oryza sativa L.).  
    SABRAO J 13(2):98–108 
Swain P, Anumalla M, Prusty S et al (2014) Characterization of some Indian native land race rice  
    accessions for drought tolerance at seedling stage. Aust J Crop Sci 8:324–331 
Swamy  BPM,  Kumar  A  (2013)  Genomics-based  precision  breeding  approaches  to  improve  
    drought    tolerance   in  rice.  Biotechnol   Adv      31:1308–1318.     https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
    quaint.2017.02.033 
Tigchelaar M, Battisti DS, Naylor RL, Ray DK (2018) Future warming increases probability of  
    globally synchronized maize production shocks. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 115:6644–6649 
Toojinda T, Siangliw M, Tragoonrung S et al (2003) Molecular genetics of submergence tolerance  
    in rice: QTL analysis of key traits. Ann Bot 91(2):243–253 
Tuberosa R (2012) Phenotyping for drought tolerance of crops in the genomics era. Front Physiol  
    3:347. https://doi.org/10.3389/fphys.2012.00347 
United Nations (2019) World population prospects 2019: highlights. United Nations Department  
    of Economic and Social Affairs, New York 
Unnevehr  LJ,  Juliano  BO,  Perez  CM  (1985)  Consumer  demand  for  rice  grain  quality  in  
    Southeast  Asia.   International   rice   research   conference,   International   Rice   Research  
    Institute, pp 15–23 
Utsumi Y, Utsumi C, Sawada T et al (2011) Functional diversity of isoamylase oligomers: the  
    ISA1  homo-oligomer  is  essential  for  amylopectin  biosynthesis  in  rice  endosperm.  Plant  
    Physiol 156:61–77 
Van Oort PAJJ (2018) Mapping abiotic stresses for rice in Africa: drought, cold, iron toxicity,  
    salinity and sodicity. Field Crops Res 219:55–75. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fcr.2018.01.016 
Van Oort PA, Zwart SJ (2018) Impacts of climate change on rice production in Africa and causes  
    of simulated yield changes. Glob Chang Biol 24(3):1029–1045 
Vemanna RS, Bakade R, Bharti P et al (2019) Cross-talk signaling in rice during combined drought  
    and bacterial blight stress. Front Plant Sci 10:193 
Venu RC, Sreerekha MV, Nobuta K et al (2011) Deep sequencing reveals the complex and coor- 
    dinated  transcriptional  regulation  of  genes  related  to  grain  quality  in  rice  cultivars.  BMC  
    Genomics 12:190. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1551- 2916.2005.00910.x 
Venuprasad R, Dalid CO, Del Valle M et al (2009) Identification and characterization of large-  
    effect quantitative trait loci for grain yield under lowland drought stress in rice using bulk-  
    segregant analysis. Theor Appl Genet 120:177–190 
Verma AK, Deepti S (2016) Abiotic stress and crop improvement: current scenario. Adv Plants  
    Agric Res 4:149 

----------------------- Page 109-----------------------

96                                                                                             J. Ali et al. 

Vikram P, Swamy BPM, Dixit S et al (2011) qDTY 1.1, a major QTL for rice grain yield under  
    reproductive-stage drought stress with a consistent effect in multiple elite genetic backgrounds.  
    BMC Genet 12:89 
Vikram  P,  Swamy  BPM,  Dixit  S  et  al  (2015)  Drought  susceptibility  of  modern  rice  varieties:  
    an effect of linkage of drought tolerance with undesirable traits. Sci Rep 5:1–18. https://doi. 
    org/10.1063/1.4791353 
Wang Y, Zhang L, Nafisah A et al (2013) Selection efficiencies for improving drought/salt tol- 
    erances and yield using introgression breeding in rice (Oryza sativa L.). Crop J 1:134–142.  
    https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cj.2013.07.006 
Wang W, Fu B, Ali J et al (2015) Genome-wide responses to selection and genetic networks under- 
    lying submergence tolerance in rice. Plant Genome 8(2):1–13 
Wang X, Pang Y, Zhang J et al (2017) Genome-wide and gene-based association mapping for rice  
    eating and cooking characteristics and protein content. Sci Rep 7:1–10. https://doi.org/10.1038/ 
    s41598- 017- 17347- 5 
Wing RA, Purugganan MD, Zhang Q (2018) The rice genome revolution: from an ancient grain  
    to Green Super Rice. Nat Rev Genet 19:505–517. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41576- 018- 0024- z 
Xie Y, Shen R, Chen L, Liu Y-G (2019) Molecular mechanisms of hybrid sterility in rice. Sci China  
    Life Sci 62(6):737–743 
Xing Y, Guo S, Chen X et al (2018) Nitrogen metabolism is affected in the nitrogen-deficient  
    rice mutant esl4 with a calcium-dependent protein kinase gene mutation. Plant Cell Physiol  
    59:2512–2525 
Xu Y, Crouch JH (2008) Marker-assisted selection in plant breeding: from publications to practice.  
    Crop Sci 48:391–407 
Xu K, Xu X, Fukao T et al (2006) Sub1A is an ethylene-response-factor-like gene that confers  
    submergence tolerance to rice. Nature 442(7103):705–708 
Yadav S, Sandhu N, Singh VK et al (2019) Genotyping-by-sequencing based QTL mapping for  
    rice grain yield under reproductive stage drought stress tolerance. Sci Rep 9:1–12 
Yano M, Lin HX, Takeuchi Y et al (2003) Marker-assisted dissection and pyramiding of complex  
    traits in rice. In: Mew TW et al (eds) Rice Science: Innovations and Impact for Livelihood.  
    IRRI, pp 257–263 
Ye C, Fukai S, Godwin I et al (2009) Cold tolerance in rice varieties at different growth stages.  
    Crop Pasture Sci 60:328–338 
Yorobe J, Pede V, Rejesus R et al (2014) Yield and income effects of the Green Super Rice (GSR)  
    varieties: evidence from a fixed-effects model in the Philippines. Selected paper prepared for  
    presentation at the Agricultural & Applied Economics Association’s 2014 Annual Meeting,  
    Minneapolis, MN, July 27–29, 2014. 31 p. https://doi.org/10.1063/1.1609251 
Yorobe JM, Ali J, Pede VO et al (2016) Yield and income effects of rice varieties with tolerance  
    of multiple abiotic stresses: the case of green super rice (GSR) and flooding in the Philippines.  
    Agric Econ 47:1–11 
Yu Y, Zhao Z, Shi Y et al (2016) Hybrid sterility in rice (Oryza sativa L.) involves the tetratrico- 
    peptide repeat domain containing protein. Genetics 203:1439–1451 
Yu S, Ali J, Zhang C et al (2020) Genomic breeding of Green Super Rice varieties and their deploy- 
    ment in Asia and Africa. Theor Appl Genet 133:1427–1442 
Yuan LP (2017) Progress in super-hybrid rice breeding. Crop J 5:100W102 
Yun BB-W, Kim M-GM, Handoyo T, Kim KK-M (2014) Analysis of rice grain quality-associated  
    quantitative trait loci by using genetic mapping. Am J Plant Sci 5:1125. https://doi.org/10.4236/ 
    ajps.2014.59125 
Zhang  Q  (2007)  Strategies  for  developing  Green  Super  Rice.  Proc  Natl  Acad  Sci  U  S  A  
    104:16402–16409. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0708013104 
Zhang F, Zhai HQ, Paterson AH et al (2011) Dissecting genetic networks underlying complex  
    phenotypes: the theoretical framework. PLoS One 6(1):e14541 

----------------------- Page 110-----------------------

Green Super Rice (GSR) Traits: Breeding and Genetics for Multiple Biotic and Abiotic…               97 

Zhang  F,  Zhang  F,  Huang  L  et  al  (2016)  Overlap  between  signaling  pathways  responsive  to  
    Xanthomonas oryzae pv. oryzae infection and drought stress in rice introgression line revealed  
    by RNA-seq. J Plant Growth Regul 35:345–356. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00344- 015- 9538- 1 
Zhang Z, Li JJJ, Pan Y et al (2017) Natural variation in CTB4a enhances rice adaptation to cold  
    habitats. Nat Commun 8:1–13. https://doi.org/10.1007/BF01337500 
Zhang J, Guo T, Yang J et al (2020) QTL mapping and haplotype analysis revealed candidate genes  
    for grain thickness in rice (Oryza sativa L.). Mol Breed 40:1–12 
Zhou Y, Cai H, Xiao J et al (2009) Over-expression of aspartate aminotransferase genes in rice  
    resulted in altered nitrogen metabolism and increased amino acid content in seeds. Theor Appl  
    Genet 118:1381–1390 
Zhou Z, Li H, Sun Y et al (2010) Effect of selection for high yield, drought and salinity tolerances  
    on yield-related traits in rice (Oryza sativa L.). Acta Agron Sin 36:1725–1735 
Zhu Y, Chen K, Mi X et al (2015) Identification and fine mapping of a stably expressed QTL for  
    cold tolerance at the booting stage using an interconnected breeding population in rice. PLoS  
    One 10:e0145704. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0145704 

Open Access      This chapter is licensed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution 4.0  
International License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/), which permits use, sharing,  
adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give appropriate  
credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons license and  
indicate if changes were made. 
    The images or other third party material in this chapter are included in the chapter's Creative  
Commons license, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not  
included in the chapter's Creative Commons license and your intended use is not permitted by  
statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from  
the copyright holder. 

----------------------- Page 111-----------------------

Advances in Two-Line Heterosis Breeding  
in Rice via the Temperature-Sensitive  
Genetic Male Sterility System 

Jauhar Ali, Madonna Dela Paz, and Christian John Robiso 

Abstract  Hybrid rice technology is a viable strategy to increase rice production  
and productivity, especially in countries with limited cultivable land for agriculture  
and irrigation water, along with costlier chemical inputs. The three-line hybrid rice  
technology adoption rate is slowing down because of restricted heterosis per se, the  
availability  of  better  combining  ability  in  cytoplasmic  male  sterile  lines,  lower  
hybrid seed reproducibility, and limited market acceptability of hybrids. Two-line  
heterosis breeding could overcome these shortcomings. However, the wide-scale  
adoption and use of two-line hybrid rice technology are possible through systematic  
research and breeding efforts to develop temperature-sensitive genetic male sterile  
(TGMS) lines with low (<24 °C) critical sterility temperature point, which is dis- 
cussed in this chapter. Research on the genetics, breeding, grain quality, and resis- 
tance to insect pests and diseases for TGMS line development and physiological  
characterization is also discussed. In addition, the identification and validation of  
natural  sites  for TGMS  self-seed  multiplication  and  hybrid  rice  seed  production  
through GIS mapping and climatic data analytical tools are also tackled. The devel- 
opment of high-yielding two-line rice hybrids and improvement in hybrid rice seed  
reproducibility could help in their wide-scale adoption. 

Keywords  Temperature-sensitive genetic male sterile (TGMS) lines · Critical  
sterility temperature point (CSTP) · Physiological characterization · Genetics ·  
Rice 

J. Ali (*) · M. Dela Paz · C. J. Robiso  
Rice Breeding Platform, International Rice Research Institute, Los Baños, Philippines 
e-mail: j.ali@irri.org 

© The Author(s) 2021                                                                            99 
J. Ali, S. H. Wani (eds.), Rice Improvement,  
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-66530-2_4 

----------------------- Page 112-----------------------

100                                                                                       J. Ali et al. 

1     Introduction 

Global rice production in 2018 was 782 million tons from 167.1 million hectares  
with an average productivity of 4.68 t/ha (FAOSTAT 2020). However, production  
needs to keep pace with the increasing food demand in the coming decades, espe- 
cially when the global human population is predicted to reach 9.73 billion by 2050  
(Worldometer 2020). Increasing rice production under declining resources such as  
cultivable land and irrigation water and costlier agricultural inputs will become a  
great  challenge  in  the  coming  decades.  Furthermore,  climate  change  is  going  to  
increase the pressure on stable and sustainable rice production. 
    Hybrid rice technology is a viable approach to increase rice production under  
limited resources and climate change. This technology took roots as early as 1964 in  
China, and around the same time, international scientific communities were discuss- 
ing its prospects, especially in India, the United States, and the Philippines (Carnahan  
et al.  1972; Swaminathan et al. 1972; Athwal and Virmani 1972). However, it was  
China under Professor Yuan Longping that demonstrated hybrid rice technology on  
a commercial scale in 1976 with requisite cytoplasmic male sterile (CMS), main- 
tainer, and restorer lines. This early success led China to expand hybrid rice signifi- 
cantly  to  reach  16.7  million  ha,  accounting  for  57%  of  the  country’s  rice  area.  
Hybrid rice now accounts for more than 65% of China’s total national rice produc- 
tion. In recent years, the average productivity of rice in China has been 6.45 t/ha:  
7.50 t/ha for hybrid rice and 6.15 t/ha for conventional rice. The increased produc- 
tion of hybrid rice each year provides food for more than 70 million people (Yuan  
2014). The International Rice Research Institute (IRRI) made a significant effort to  
deploy hybrid rice technology outside China by sharing the requisite hybrid rice  
parental lines directly to both the public and private sectors. Parental lines devel- 
oped by IRRI have been used quite extensively in the release of several commercial  
hybrids from the private and public arenas in India, Nepal, Pakistan, Vietnam, the  
Philippines, Bangladesh, and Indonesia. IRRI has directly released 17 hybrids in the  
Philippines alone. 
    Despite the enormous research and extension efforts that have gone into hybrid  
rice from the early 1990s, especially in Asia, hybrid rice area is growing slowly.  
Among the major reasons for the slow growth is, first, the available level of hetero- 
sis or hybrid rice yield advantage over the best checks is from 15% to 20%. Second,  
hybrid rice seed reproducibility is still below 2 t/ha for most hybrids outside China,  
besides being cumbersome and expensive, which is not attractive to the private seed  
industry to adopt the technology on a wide scale. Third, hybrids do not possess the  
required amount of disease and insect pest resistance in the target regions. Fourth,  
the grain quality of hybrids does not meet market needs, and decreased head rice  
recovery is keeping farmers from adopting hybrid rice. In addition, the rapid rise in  
labor wages in India and China is causing the seed industry to look for alternative  
approaches to decrease the cost of hybrid rice seed and make it more efficient based  
on parental line improvement to entice farmers to adopt hybrid rice and benefit. In  
this regard, the Hybrid Rice Development Consortium (HRDC) at IRRI is consider- 

----------------------- Page 113-----------------------

Advances in Two-Line Heterosis Breeding in Rice via the Temperature-Sensitive...         101 

ing  these  factors  and  developing  market-oriented  parental  materials.  Ongoing  
hybrid rice research at IRRI seeks to improve the levels of outcrossing and hybrid  
seed reproducibility, especially by developing newer CMS lines. The HRDC has  
been sharing these improved materials with both the public and private sectors in an  
aggressive manner since 2016. Currently, the area of hybrid rice outside China is  
approximately 8 million ha, and pushing hybrid rice technology is vital to overcome  
its shortcomings. In this context, it is crucial to revisit other alternative technologies  
such as two-line hybrid rice technology for efficient seed production and increased  
heterosis. 

2     The Emergence of Two-Line Hybrid Rice Technology  
     with a Historical Perspective 

Two-line  hybrid  breeding  began  with  the  discovery  of  a  photoperiod-sensitive  
genic  male  sterile  (PGMS)  mutant,  Nongken  58S,  in  Hubei  Province,  China,  
which remains male sterile under long-day conditions (>13.45 h) or fertile under  
shorter day (<13 h) conditions (Shi  1981,  1985; Shi and Deng  1986). Likewise,  
the  discovery  of  thermosensitive  genic  male  sterility  (TGMS)  that  renders  the  
plant male sterile at higher mean temperatures and reverts it to fertility at lower  
mean  temperatures  allowed  significant  development  of  the  technology.  Several  
TGMS sources of spontaneous or induced origin were discovered such as Annong  
S-1  and  Anxiang  S  (Tan  et  al.  1990;  Lu  et  al.  1994)  in  China,  Norin  PL  12  
(Maruyama et al. 1990, 1991) in Japan, IR32364 at IRRI (Virmani and Voc 1991),  
and SM 5, F61, and SA 2 in India (Ali  1993; Ali et al. 1995; Hussain et al. 2012;  
Reddy et al. 2000) (Table  1). Moreover, photo-thermosensitive genic male steril- 
ity systems were also discovered, for which researchers found the interaction of  
photoperiod and temperature that governs male sterility-fertility alteration. Based  
on  these  three  male  sterility-fertility  alteration  systems  involving  photoperiod,  
temperature, and photo-thermo interactions, Yuan ( 1987) put forward a new strat- 
egy of hybrid rice breeding that did not involve a maintainer line, and it was called  
the two-line method. Any fertile line with a dominant gene for this trait could be  
used as a pollen parent to develop rice hybrids (Lu et al.  1994). Two-line hybrid  
rice  technology  has  several  advantages  over  the  three-line  system,  including  a  
wider range of germplasm resources as pollen parents, thus allowing opportuni- 
ties to exploit higher heterosis and simpler procedures for breeding and hybrid  
seed production (Ali et al. 2018; Chen et al. 2020). 
   In  tropical  conditions,  day  length  differences  are  marginal,  and  therefore,  the  
TGMS  system  is  more  useful  than  the  PGMS  and  PTGMS  systems.  Consistent  
temperature differences are found at different altitudes and over different seasons in  
the same location or region, which could be exploited for two-line hybrid rice devel- 
opment. However, successful exploitation of this novel male sterility system relies  
on knowledge of the fertility behavior of TGMS lines (Chandirakala et al. 2008). 

----------------------- Page 114-----------------------

                                                                                                                                                                                               1 
Table 1   Origin and fertility-sterility transformation behavior of photoperiod-thermosensitive and temperature-sensitive male sterile sources in rice                                         0 
                                                                                                                                                                                               2 
                                                                                   Critical temp. and  
                                                                                   photoperiod for inducing                     Sensitive stage  
                                                                Place of           sterility                          CFTP      (days before  
 Source                 Ecotype        Origin of gene           development        (h)                (°C)            (°C)      heading)           References 
 Photoperiod-thermosensitive genic male sterile (PTGMS) (interaction of h and °C) 
 02428 S                –              NK58S                    JAAS                                                                               Li (2009) 
 108 S                  –              NK58S/9022               NAAS                                                                               Li (2009) 
 1541 S                 L-japonica                              YIAS               13.75–14.00         28.0           22.0                         Lu et al. ( 1994); Li (2009) 
 1647 S                 –                                       BAAS                                                                               Li (2009) 
 2177 S                 indica                                  AGAI 
 26 Zhai Zao            indica         Induced (R), China                          12.00–14.00       23.0–25.0                                     Shen et al. (1994) 
 3008 S                 japonica       NK58S/                   HAC                                                                                Li (2009) 
 31111 S                L-japonica     NK58S/31111              HAU                14.00–14.75         28.0           22.0                         Li (2009) 
 31301-1S                                                                                              28.0           24.0                         Zhang et al. ( 1994) 
 3502 S                 L-japonica     7001S/Pecos              AAAS               14                  22.6                                        Li (2009) 
 3516 S                 L-japonica     N5047S/(7001S/           AAAS               14                  23.5                                        Li (2009) 
                                       Zhao107) 
 4008 S                 L-japonica     7001S/Reyan 2            AAAS               14                  24.0                                        Li (2009) 
 5021 S                 –              SDL of MS type.          NAU and                                                                            Li (2009) 
                                       S.mutant                 JAAS 
 5047 S                                                                                                30.0           26.0                         Zhang et al. ( 1994) 
 6334 S                 L-japonica                              HNU                13.75–14.00       24.0–30.0                                     Li (2009) 
 7001 S                 E-japonica     NK58S/917                AAAS               13.50–14.0          30.0           22.0                         Lu and Wang ( 1988); Lu et al.  
                                       (HuXuan19/                                                                                                  (1994); Zhang et al. (1994);  
                                       IR661//C57)                                                                                                 Mou et al. (2003); Li (2009) 
                                                                                                                                                                                               J 
                                                                                                                                                                                               . 
                                                                                                                                                                                                 
 8087 S                 E-japonica     7001S/Zhao 107           AAAS               14                  23.0                                        Li (2009)                                   A 
                                                                                                                                                                                               l 
                                                                                                                                                                                               i 
                                                                                                                                                                                                 
 8801 S                 indica                                  HXAU                                                                                                                           e 
                                                                                                                                                                                               t 
                                                                                                                                                                                                 
                                                                                                                                                                                               a 
                                                                                                                                                                                               l 
                                                                                                                                                                                               . 

----------------------- Page 115-----------------------

                                                                                                                                                                                     A 
                                                                                                                                                                                     d 
                                                                                                                                                                                     v 
                                                                              Critical temp. and                                                                                     a 
                                                                                                                                                                                     n 
                                                                                                                                                                                     c 
                                                                              photoperiod for inducing                   Sensitive stage                                             e 
                                                                                                                                                                                     s 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
                                                                              sterility                        CFTP                                                                  i 
                                                            Place of                                                     (days before                                                n 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
Source                Ecotype        Origin of gene         development       (h)               (°C)           (°C)      heading)          References                                T 
                                                                                                                                                                                     w 
                                                                                                                                                                                     o 
8902 S                indica                                WU                13.25–13.45       27.0–30.0                                                                             - 
                                                                                                                                                                                     L 
                                                                                                                                                                                     i 
8906 S                indica                                WU                13.25–13.45       26.0           24.0                        Zhang et al. ( 1994)                      n 
                                                                                                                                                                                     e 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
89-7S                                                                                           30.0           24.0                        Zhang et al. ( 1994)                      H 
                                                                                                                                                                                     e 
                                                                                                                                                                                     t 
8912 S                indica                                WU                13.25–13.45       30.0           26.0                        Zhang et al. ( 1994)                      e 
                                                                                                                                                                                     r 
                                                                                                                                                                                     o 
                                                                                                                                                                                     s 
9044 S                japonica                              HAA                                 32             28.0                        Zhang et al. ( 1994)                      i 
                                                                                                                                                                                     s 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
916 S                 –              NK58S                  JAAS                                                                           Li (2009)                                 B 
                                                                                                                                                                                     r 
                                                                                                                                                                                     e 
                                                                                                                                                                                     e 
AB0195                japonica                              WDAU                                                                                                                     d 
                                                                                                                                                                                     i 
                                                                                                                                                                                     n 
C407S                 japonica       Eyi MR                 CAAS                                                                           Li (2009)                                g 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
                                                                                                                                                                                     i 
                                                                                                                                                                                     n 
CIS 28-10S            indica         S. mutant, China                         12.00–14.00                                                  Huang and Zhang ( 1991)                     
                                                                                                                                                                                     R 
                                                                                                                                                                                     i 
Double 8-2S           L-japonica     NK58S/Double           WU                14.00–14.25                                                  Li (2009)                                 c 
                                                                                                                                                                                     e 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
                                                                                                                                                                                     v 
                                     8–2 
                                                                                                                                                                                     i 
                                                                                                                                                                                     a 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
EGMS                  japonica       Induced (C), USA                         13.00–14.00                                                  Rutger and Schaeffer ( 1989)              t 
                                                                                                                                                                                     h 
                                                                                                                                                                                     e 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
                                                                                                                                                                                     T 
HN5-2S                indica                                                                    24.0           24.0                        Zhang et al. ( 1994) 
                                                                                                                                                                                     e 
HS-1                  indica         HPGMR                  FU                                                                             Lu et al. ( 1994)                         m 
                                                                                                                                                                                    p 
                                                                                                     c                                                                               e 
                                                                                                                                                                                     r 
HS-3                  indica         NK58S                  FAU               12.5              23.0                                       Mou et al. (2003) 
                                                                                                                                                                                     a 
                                                                                                                                                                                     t 
J-3S                  –              NK58S                  JAAS                                                                           Li (2009)                                 u 
                                                                                                                                                                                     r 
                                                                                                                                                                                     e 
                                                                                                                                                                                      - 
                                                                                                                                                                                     S 
K14 S                 indica                                GAU 
                                                                                                                                                                                     e 
K7 S                  indica                                GAU                                                                                                                      n 
                                                                                                                                                                                     s 
                                                                                                                                                                                     i 
                                                                                                                                                                                     t 
                                                                                                                                                                                     i 
                                                                                                                                                                                     v 
K9 S                  indica                                GAU 
                                                                                                                                                                                     e 
                                                                                                                                                                                     . 
                                                                                                                                                                                     . 
Liuqianxin S          –              NK58S                  JAAS                                                                           Li (2009)                                 . 

M 201                 japonica       Induced (C), USA                         12.00–14.00                                                  Oard and Hu (1995) 
M105 S                –              60 Coγ radiating       WU                                                                             Li (2009) 
                                     105 
                                                                                                                                                                                      1 
                                                                                                                                                                                      0 
                                                                                                                                                                  (continued)         3 

----------------------- Page 116-----------------------

                                                                                                                                                                                            1 
Table 1   (continued)                                                                                                                                                                       0 
                                                                                                                                                                                            4 
                                                                                  Critical temp. and  
                                                                                  photoperiod for inducing                    Sensitive stage  
                                                               Place of           sterility                         CFTP      (days before  
 Source                 Ecotype        Origin of gene          development        (h)               (°C)            (°C)      heading)           References 
 M901 S                 indica                                                                       26.0           24.0 
 MSr 54A(B)            japonica        S. mutant, China                           13.00–14.00                                                    Lu and Wang ( 1988) 
 N422 S                japonica        7001S/lun hui 422       HHRRC,                                                                            Li (2009) 
                                                               CAU 
 N5047 S                L-japonica     NK58S/5047              HAAS               14.00–14.25       26.0–30.0                                    Lu et al. ( 1994); Li (2009) 
 N5088 S                L-japonica     NK58S/Nonghu26          HAAS               13.50–14.00       22.0–30.0       22.0                         Zhang et al. ( 1994); Lu et al.  
                                                                                                                                                 (1994) 
 N95076 S               L-japonica     5088S/7001S             HAAS                                  24.0                                        Li (2009) 
 N9643 S                L-japonica     NK58S/9643              HAAS               >14.00             24.0                                        Li (2009) 
 Nongken58S             L-japonica     S. mutant from          Hubei              13.75–14.00        30.0           24.0                         Shi and Deng (1986); Zhang  
                                       NK58, China                                                                                               et al. ( 1994) 
 Pei’ai64S              indica         NK58S-derived,          HHRRC              13.00–13.30        24.0           22.0                         Yang et al. (2002) 
                                       China 
 Shuanggung S          japonica                                HHRRC                                 32.0           28.0                         Zhang et al. ( 1994) 
 Shuguang612S           indica         NK58S                   SAU                12.5              23.5c                                        Lu et al. ( 1994) (T), Mou et al.  

                                                                                                                                                 (2003) (P) 
 W6154 S                indica                                 HAAS               13.00–13.30        26.0           24.0 
 W7415 S                indica                                 HAAS               13.00–13.30        26.0           24.0 
 W91607S                                                                                             26.0           24.0                         Zhang et al. ( 1994) 
 W9593 S                indica         NK58S                   HAAS               13                23.5c                                        Mou et al. (2003) 

 WD 1S                  L-japonica     NK58S/WD1               WU                 14.00–14.50                                                    Li (2009) 
                                                                                                                                                                                            J 
                                                                                                                                                                                            . 
                                                                                                                                                                                              
 Wuxiang S              indica                                                                                                                                                              A 
                                                                                                                                                                                            l 
                                                                                                                                                                                            i 
 (WXS)                                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                                                                                                                            e 
                                                                                                                                                                                            t 
                                                                                                                                                                                              
 X 88                  japonica                                                   >13.75                                      10–25              Lu et al. ( 1994)                          a 
                                                                                                                                                                                            l 
                                                                                                                                                                                            . 

----------------------- Page 117-----------------------

                                                                                                                                                                                        A 
                                                                                                                                                                                        d 
                                                                                                                                                                                        v 
                                                                               Critical temp. and                                                                                       a 
                                                                                                                                                                                        n 
                                                                                                                                                                                        c 
                                                                               photoperiod for inducing                    Sensitive stage                                              e 
                                                                                                                                                                                        s 
                                                                                                                                                                                          
                                                                                sterility                        CFTP                                                                   i 
                                                             Place of                                                      (days before                                                 n 
                                                                                                                                                                                          
Source                 Ecotype       Origin of gene          development        (h)              (°C)            (°C)      heading)           References                                T 
                                                                                                                                                                                        w 
                                                                                                                                                                                        o 
Zhenong 1S             L-japonica    NK58S                   ZAAS                                                                             Li (2009)                                  - 
                                                                                                                                                                                        L 
                                                                                                                                                                                        i 
Temperature-sensitive male sterile (TGMS) (°C)                                                                                                                                          n 
                                                                                                                                                                                        e 
                                                                                                                                                                                          
9201                   indica        560 S                   FU                                                                               Lu et al. ( 1994)                         H 
                                                                                                                                                                                        e 
                                                                                                                                                                                        t 
1103 S                 indica        HPGMR                   WU                                                                               Lu et al. ( 1994)                         e 
                                                                                                                                                                                        r 
                                                                                                                                                                                        o 
                                                                                                      c                                                                                 s 
1356 S                 indica        Annong S-1              HHRR              –                 24.5                                         Mou et al. (2003)                         i 
                                                                                                                                                                                        s 
                                                                                                                                                                                          
3418 S                 indica        HPGMR                   AAAS                                                                             Lu et al. ( 1994)                         B 
                                                                                                                                                                                        r 
                                                                                                                                                                                        e 
                                                                                                                                                                                        e 
                                                                                                                                                                                        d 
545 S                  indica                                Hunan 
                                                                                                                                                                                        i 
                                                                                                                                                                                        n 
5460 S                 indica        Induced (R), China      Fujian                              28.0–26.0                                    Yang et al. ( 1990)                      g 
                                                                                                                                                                                          
                                                                                                                                                                                        i 
                                                                                                                                                                                        n 
6442S                  indica        HPGMR                   JAAS                                                                             Lu et al. ( 1994)                           
                                                                                                                                                                                        R 
                                                                                                      c                                                                                 i 
810 S                  indica        AnnongS-1               AJAU,             –                 24.0                                         Mou et al. (2003)                         c 
                                                                                                                                                                                        e 
                                                                                                                                                                                          
Annong S-1             indica        S. mutant               Hunan                               30.2–27.0                                    Tan et al. ( 1990)                        v 
                                                                                                                                                                                        i 
                                                                                                                                                                                        a 
                                                                                                                                                                                          
                                                                                                                                                                                        t 
Anxiang S              indica        Annong S                HHRRC                                                                            Lu et al. ( 1994)                         h 
                                                                                                                                                                                        e 
                                                                                                                                                                                          
                                                                                                                                                                                        T 
ATG-1                  indica 
                                                                                                                                                                                        e 
C815 S                 indica                                                                                                                                                           m 
                                                                                                                                                                                       p 
                                                                                                                                                                                        e 
Dianxin 1A            japonica       CMS                     Yunan                               20.0–23.0                                    Lu et al. ( 1994)                         r 
                                                                                                                                                                                        a 
                                                                                                                                                                                        t 
                                                                                                                                                                                        u 
DRR 1S                                                       DRR                                 30.0                                         Ramakrishna et al. (2006)                 r 
                                                                                                                                                                                        e 
                                                                                                                                                                                         - 
F 61                   indica        Induced mutation        IARI                                22.0–30.9                 19                 Ali et al. ( 1995)                        S 
                                                                                                                                                                                        e 
                                     (C) India                                                                                                                                          n 
                                                                                                                                                                                        s 
                                                                                                                                                                                        i 
                                                                                                                                                                                        t 
                                                                                                                                                                                        i 
GD 2S                  indica        HPGMR                   GDAAS                                                                            Lu et al. ( 1994)                         v 
                                                                                                                                                                                        e 
                                                                                                                                                                                        . 
                                                                                                                                                                                        . 
Guangzhan63S           indica        NK58S-derived,                                                                                                                                     . 
                                     China 
H 89-1                japonica       Induced (R), Japan                                          31.0–28.0                                    Maruyama et al. ( 1991) 

                                                                                                                                                                                         1 
                                                                                                                                                                     (continued) 
                                                                                                                                                                                         0 
                                                                                                                                                                                         5 

----------------------- Page 118-----------------------

                                                                                                                                                                                                  1 
Table 1   (continued)                                                                                                                                                                             0 
                                                                                                                                                                                                  6 
                                                                                    Critical temp. and  
                                                                                    photoperiod for inducing                      Sensitive stage  
                                                                 Place of           sterility                           CFTP      (days before  
 Source                  Ecotype        Origin of gene           development        (h)                (°C)             (°C)      heading)           References 
 Hengnong S-1            indica         Cross breeding,          Hunan                                 29.0–30.0                                     Lu et al. ( 1994) 
                                        China 
 ID24                                                                                                  29.5–25.9                  10–14               Sanchez and Virmani (2005) 
 IR32364-20-1-           indica         Induced (R), IRRI        IRRI                                  32.0–24.0                                     Virmani and Voc ( 1991) 
 3-2B 
 IR38949                 indica         Introgression from       IRRI                                  30.0–24.0                                     Virmani ( 1992) 
                                        Norin PL12 
 IR68298                                Introgression from       IRRI                                  31.5–27.1                  11–17               Sanchez and Virmani (2005) 
                                        Norin PL12 
 IR68935                                Introgression from       IRRI                                  32.4–27.7                  5–14                Sanchez and Virmani (2005) 
                                        Norin PL12 
 IR68945                 indica         Introgression from       IRRI                                  30.0–24.0                  15–21              Virmani ( 1992); Sanchez and  
                                        Norin PL12                                                                                                   Virmani (2005) 
 IR71018                                Introgression from       IRRI                                  32.2–27.4                  12–24               Sanchez and Virmani (2005) 
                                        Norin PL12 
 IR73827-23S                                                     IRRI                                  35.9                       19                 Ramakrishna et al. (2006) 
 IR72093                                Introgression from       IRRI                                  30.4–26.3                  8–16                Sanchez and Virmani (2005) 
                                        Norin PL12 
 IV A                    indica         Cross breeding,                                                24.0–28.0                                     Zhang et al. (1991) 
                                        China 
 J207S                   indica         S. mutant, China                                               31.0- > 31.0                                  Jia et al. (2001) 
 JP 2                    indica         S. mutant, India         IARI                                  23.0–33.9                  19                 Ali et al. ( 1995)                           J 
                                                                                                                                                                                                  . 
                                                                                                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                                                  A 
 JP 24A                  indica         CMS, India               IARI                                  23.0–33.8                                     Ali ( 1993)                                  l 
                                                                                                                                                                                                  i 
                                                                                                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                                                  e 
                                                                                                                                                                                                  t 
                                                                                                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                                                  a 
                                                                                                                                                                                                  l 
                                                                                                                                                                                                  . 

----------------------- Page 119-----------------------

                                                                                                                                                                   A 
                                                                                                                                                                   d 
                                                                                                                                                                   v 
                                                                       Critical temp. and                                                                          a 
                                                                                                                                                                   n 
                                                                                                                                                                   c 
                                                                      photoperiod for inducing               Sensitive stage                                       e 
                                                                                                                                                                   s 
                                                                                                                                                                     
                                                                       sterility                    CFTP                                                           i 
                                                      Place of                                               (days before                                          n 
                                                                                                                                                                     
Source              Ecotype      Origin of gene       development      (h)            (°C)          (°C)     heading)         References                           T 
                                                                                                                                                                   w 
                                                                                                                                                                   o 
JP 8-1A-12          indica       Breeding             IARI                            20.0–30.9     20.0–    23               Ali et al. ( 1995)                    - 
                                                                                                                                                                   L 
                                                                                                                                                                   i 
                                 population, India                                                  24.0                                                           n 
                                                                                                                                                                   e 
                                                                                                                                                                     
KS 1S               indica       HPGMR                GAAS                                                                    Lu et al. ( 1994)                    H 
                                                                                                                                                                   e 
                                                                                                                                                                   t 
N8 S                indica                            Hunan                                                                                                        e 
                                                                                                                                                                   r 
                                                                                                                                                                   o 
Norin PL12          japonica     Irradiation with 20 kr of gamma                      21.4–29.4              9–16             Lopez et al. (2000); Sanchez         s 
                                                                                                                                                                   i 
                                                                                                                                                                   s 
                                                                                                                                                                     
                                 rays, Japan                                                                                  and Virmani (2005)                   B 
                                                                                                                                                                   r 
                                                                                                                                                                   e 
R 59TS              indica       Induced (R), China   Fujian                                                                  Yang et al. ( 1990)                  e 
                                                                                                                                                                   d 
                                                                                                                                                                   i 
SA 2                indica       Induced mutation     IARI                            20.0–31.7              17               Ali et al. ( 1995)                   n 
                                                                                                                                                                   g 
                                                                                                                                                                     
                                 (C) India                                                                                                                         i 
                                                                                                                                                                   n 
                                                                                                                                                                     
SE21S               indica       NK58S                FAU             –               23.0c                                   Mou et al. (2003)                    R 
                                                                                                                                                                   i 
                                                                                                                                                                   c 
                                                                                                                                                                   e 
SM 3                indica       S. mutant, India                                     22.0–32.0              22               Ali et al. ( 1995)                     
                                                                                                                                                                   v 
                                                                                                                                                                   i 
SM 5                indica       S. mutant, India                                     22.0–32.3              24               Ali et al. ( 1995)                   a 
                                                                                                                                                                     
                                                                                                                                                                   t 
                                                                                                                                                                   h 
TianfengS           indica       AnnongS-1            GZAAS,          –               24.5 c                                  Mou et al. (2003)                    e 
                                                                                                                                                                     
                                                                                                                                                                   T 
TGMS 74S            indica                            TNAU                            34.2          23.0                      Rajesh et al. (2017)                 e 
                                                                                                                                                                   m 
                                                                                                                                                                   p 
TGMS 81S            indica                            TNAU                            32.9          24.2                      Rajesh et al. (2017)                 e 
                                                                                                                                                                   r 
                                                                                                                                                                   a 
TGMS 82S            indica                            TNAU                            32.9          24.2                      Rajesh et al. (2017)                 t 
                                                                                                                                                                   u 
                                                                                                                                                                   r 
TGMS 91S            indica                            TNAU                            34.2          22.7                      Rajesh et al. (2017)                 e- 
                                                                                                                                                                   S 
                                                                                                                                                                   e 
                                                                                                                                                                   n 
TGMS 92S            indica                            TNAU                            34.2          24.2                      Rajesh et al. (2017) 
                                                                                                                                                                   s 
                                                                                                                                                                   i 
TGMS 93S            indica                            TNAU                            34.2          24.2                      Rajesh et al. (2017)                 t 
                                                                                                                                                                   i 
                                                                                                                                                                   v 
                                                                                                                                                                   e 
TGMS 94S            indica                            TNAU                            34.2          24.2                      Rajesh et al. (2017)                 .. 
                                                                                                                                                                   . 
TNAU 19S            indica                            TNAU                            20.0–30.0     24.0–                     Manonmani et al. (2016) 
                                                                                                    26.0 
TNAU 27S            indica                            TNAU                            25.95         25.83    26-Jan           Sasikala et al. (2015) 
                                                                                                                                                                    1 
                                                                                                                                                                    0 
                                                                                                                                                                    7 
                                                                                                                                                  (continued) 

----------------------- Page 120-----------------------

                                                                                                                                                                                                 1 
Table 1   (continued)                                                                                                                                                                            0 
                                                                                                                                                                                                 8 
                                                                                    Critical temp. and  
                                                                                    photoperiod for inducing                     Sensitive stage  
                                                                 Place of           sterility                          CFTP      (days before  
 Source                  Ecotype        Origin of gene           development        (h)                (°C)            (°C)      heading)            References 
 TNAU 39S                indica                                  TNAU                                  20.0–30.0       24.0–                         Manonmani et al. (2016);  
                                                                                                                        26.0                         Kadirimangalam et al. (2017) 
 TNAU 45S                indica                                  TNAU                                  20.0–30.0       24.0–                         Manonmani et al. (2016);  
                                                                                                                        26.0                         Kadirimangalam et al. (2017) 
 TNAU 60S                indica                                  TNAU                                  20.0–30.0       24.0–                         Manonmani et al. (2016);  
                                                                                                                        26.0                         Kadirimangalam et al. (2017) 
 TNAU 95S                indica                                  TNAU                                  20.0–30.0       24.0–                         Manonmani et al. (2016);  
                                                                                                                        26.0                         Kadirimangalam et al. (2017) 
 TS 09 12                indica                                  TNAU                                  26.45           25.78     26-Jan              Sasikala et al. (2015) 
 TS 09 15                indica                                  TNAU                                  25.80           25.45     26-Jan              Sasikala et al. (2015) 
 TS 09 25                indica                                  TNAU                                  26.73           26.58     26-Jan              Sasikala et al. (2015) 
 TS6                     indica         Spontaneous              TNAU                                  26.7             25.5                         Latha et al. (2005) 
                                        mutant 
 TS16                    indica         Norin PL 12              IRRI                                  24.8             24.6     11-Jan              Latha et al. (2005, 2010) 
 (IR68945-433-4- 
 14) 
 TS18                    indica         Norin PL 12              IRRI                                  24.2             24.0     18-Jan              Latha et al. (2005, 2010) 
 (IR68949-11-5- 
 31) 
 TS29                    indica         Spontaneous              TNAU                                  25.6             25.3     11-Jan              Latha et al. (2005, 2010) 
                                        mutant 
 TS46                    indica         Norin PL 12              IRRI                                  25.4             25.3     26-Jan              Latha et al. (2005, 2010) 
                                                                                                                                                                                                 J 
                                                                                                                                                                                                 . 
                                                                                                                                                                                                   
 (IR68942-1-6-13-                                                                                                                                                                                A 
                                                                                                                                                                                                 l 
                                                                                                                                                                                                 i 
 13-4)                                                                                                                                                                                             
                                                                                                                                                                                                 e 
                                                                                                                                                                                                 t 
                                                                                                                                                                                                   
                                                                                                                                                                                                 a 
                                                                                                                                                                                                 l 
                                                                                                                                                                                                 . 

----------------------- Page 121-----------------------

                                                                                                                                                                                      A 
                                                                                                                                                                                      d 
                                                                                                                                                                                      v 
                                                                               Critical temp. and                                                                                     a 
                                                                                                                                                                                      n 
                                                                                                                                                                                      c 
                                                                               photoperiod for inducing                   Sensitive stage                                             e 
                                                                                                                                                                                      s 
                                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                               sterility                        CFTP                                                                  i 
                                                            Place of                                                      (days before                                                n 
                                                                                                                                                                                        
Source                Ecotype        Origin of gene         development        (h)              (°C)            (°C)     heading)           References                                T 
                                                                                                                                                                                      w 
                                                                                                                                                                                      o 
TS47 (IR68298-         indica        Norin PL 12            IRRI                                35.3            25.2     26-Jan             Latha et al. (2005, 2010)                  - 
                                                                                                                                                                                      L 
                                                                                                                                                                                      i 
11-16-3 B)                                                                                                                                                                            n 
                                                                                                                                                                                      e 
                                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                                                                                                                      H 
W6111 S                indica                               Hubei 
                                                                                                                                                                                      e 
                                                                                                                                                                                      t 
W91607 S               indica        HPGMR                  HAAS                                                                            Lu et al. ( 1994)                         e 
                                                                                                                                                                                      r 
                                                                                                                                                                                      o 
W9451 S                indica        HPGMR                  HAAS                                                                            Lu et al. ( 1994)                         s 
                                                                                                                                                                                      i 
                                                                                                                                                                                      s 
                                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                                                                                                                      B 
Xiang125S              indica        Annong S-1             HHRRC              –                23.5c                                       Mou et al. (2003) 
                                                                                                                                                                                      r 
                                                                                                                                                                                      e 
Xiangling628S          indica                                                                                                                                                         e 
                                                                                                                                                                                      d 
                                                                                                                                                                                      i 
Xianquang              indica        Breeding                                                   24.0–30.0                                   Cheng et al. (1995)                       n 
                                                                                                                                                                                     g 
                                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                                                                                                                      i 
                                     population, China                                                                                                                                n 
                                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                                                                                                                      R 
XinanS                 indica                                                                                                               Si et al. (2012)                          i 
                                                                                                                                                                                      c 
                                                                                                                                                                                      e 
                                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                                                                                                                      v 
Y58S                   indica 
                                                                                                                                                                                      i 
                                                                                                                                                                                      a 
Zhu1S                  indica                                                                                                               Yang et al. (2000)                          
                                                                                                                                                                                      t 
                                                                                                                                                                                      h 
                                                                                                                                                                                      e 
Reverse thermo-sensitive genic male sterile                                                                                                                                             
                                                                                                                                                                                      T 
(rTGMS)                                                                                                                                                                               e 
                                                                                                                                                                                      m 
                                                                                                                                                                                     p 
JP38                   indica        S. mutant, India       IARI                                24.0–30.5                                   Ali ( 1993)                               e 
                                                                                                                                                                                      r 
                                                                                                   c                                                                                  a 
Dianxin 1A            japonica       China                  Yunnan                              22                                          Yiming ( 1988); Zhang et al.              t 
                                                                                                                                                                                      u 
                                                                                                                                                                                      r 
                                                                                                                                            (1991)                                    e 
                                                                                                                                                                                       - 
                                                                                                   c                                                                                  S 
IVA                    indica        China                  Yunnan                              24              27.0                                                                  e 
                                                                                                                                                                                      n 
                                                                                                     c                                                                                s 
                                                                                                                                                                                      i 
26 Zhaizao             india         Mutant, China                                              >23                                         Shen et al. (1994)                        t 
                                                                                                                                                                                      i 
                                                                                                                                                                                      v 
J207S                                                                                                                                       Jia et al. (2001)                         .e 
                                                                                                                                                                                      . 
                                                                                                                                                                                      . 
Reverse photoperiod-sensitive genic male sterile (rPGMS) 
YiD1S                                B3/Hongjiang           China                                                                           Gao (1991) 

                                                                                                                                                                   (continued) 
                                                                                                                                                                                       1 
                                                                                                                                                                                       0 
                                                                                                                                                                                       9 

----------------------- Page 122-----------------------

                                                                                                                                                                                                         1 
Table 1   (continued)                                                                                                                                                                                    1 
                                                                                                                                                                                                         0 
                                                                                       Critical temp. and  
                                                                                       photoperiod for inducing                       Sensitive stage  
                                                                   Place of            sterility                           CFTP       (days before  
 Source                  Ecotype         Origin of gene            development         (h)                (°C)             (°C)       heading)            References 
 IVA                      indica         From cross                Yunnan                                                                                 Zhang et al. (1991); Virmani  
                                         breeding                                                                                                         et al. (2003) 
 N10S                                                                                                                                                     Li et al. (1991) 
 N13S                                                                                                                                                     Li et al. (1991) 
 go543S                                                                                                                                                   Yang and Zhu ( 1996) 
 DiannongS-2                                                                                                                                              Jiang et al. ( 1997) 
 D38S                                                                                                                                                     Joseph et al. (2011) 
 D52S                                                                                                                                                     Joseph et al. (2011) 

GAAS  Guangxi Academy  of Agricultural  Sciences,  GDAAS  Guangdong Academy  of Agricultural  Sciences,  GZAAS  Gangzhou Academy  of Agricultural  
Sciences, TNAU Tamil Nadu Agricultural University, HAAS Hubei Academy of Agricultural Sciences, JAAS Jiangxi Academy of Agricultural Sciences, AAAS  
Anhui Academy of Agricultural Sciences, HHRRC Hunan Hybrid Rice Research Center, IARI Indian Agricultural Research Institute,  WU Wuhan University,  
SAU  Sichuan Agricultural  University,  FU  Fujian  University,  FAU  Fujian Agricultural  University,  GAU  Guangxi Agricultural  University,  AJAU An-Jiang  
Agricultural University, HAU Huazhong Agricultural University, HAC Hubei Agricultural College, AGAI Anhui Guangde Agricultural Institute, YIAS Yichang  
Institute of Agricultural Sciences, ZAAS Zheijiang Academy of Agricultural Sciences, L late, E early, S spontaneous, SDL short day length,  CDL critical day  
length, CSP critical sterility point, CFP critical fertility point, R irradiation, C chemical mutagens. Several introgressed forms from Nongken 58S and Annong  
S-1 developed by Yang (1997) and Mou et al. (1998) not included here 

                                                                                                                                                                                                        J 
                                                                                                                                                                                                        . 
                                                                                                                                                                                                          
                                                                                                                                                                                                        A 
                                                                                                                                                                                                        l 
                                                                                                                                                                                                        i 
                                                                                                                                                                                                          
                                                                                                                                                                                                        e 
                                                                                                                                                                                                        t 
                                                                                                                                                                                                          
                                                                                                                                                                                                        a 
                                                                                                                                                                                                        l 
                                                                                                                                                                                                        . 

----------------------- Page 123-----------------------

Advances in Two-Line Heterosis Breeding in Rice via the Temperature-Sensitive...            111 

   In this regard, to address tropical Asian markets, IRRI is refocused on developing  
two-line  hybrid  rice  technology  with  usable  TGMS  parental  lines.  The  two-line  
hybrid rice approach via TGMS holds great promise as it does away with one step  
of outcrossing of parental line production, thus directly bringing down seed costs.  
Although  the  two-line  system  is  well  established,  especially  in Vietnam  and  the  
Philippines, expansion to other regions remains a challenge because of the lack of  
TGMS lines with a low critical sterility temperature point (CSTP) of 24 °C. Such  
low CSTP of TGMS lines could be a game changer in tropical Asia vis-à-vis earlier  
discovered TGMS lines with CSTP of >27 °C. Currently, the annual planting area  
of two-line hybrid rice in China has surpassed 5 million ha, while fully exploiting  
heterosis in rice (Chen et al.  2020). With recent research advances, TGMS-based  
two-line hybrid rice breeding is poised to replace three-line hybrid rice technology  
over the next decade (Ali et al. 2018). 

3     Advantages and Disadvantages of the TGMS System  
     in the Tropics 

The TGMS-based two-line system has several advantages over the three-line sys- 
tem. First, hybrid seed production is less cumbersome as TGMS does not require  
maintainers and seed can be self-multiplied under fertility-conducive low-tempera- 

Fig. 1   TGMS system for the production of two-line rice hybrids 

----------------------- Page 124-----------------------

112                                                                                                    J. Ali et al. 

ture conditions (Fig.  1). Second, there is a higher probability of identifying the het- 
erotic  pool  and  market-oriented  hybrids,  as  any  nonTGMS  parent  is  a  potential  
pollen  parent. Third,  the  current  CMS  three-line  system  is  primarily  based  on  a  
single source of wild abortive (WA) cytoplasm that continues to pose a constant  
threat  because  of  the  adverse  effects  associated  with  it.  However,  the  two-line  
approach also has certain shortcomings, such as the adverse effect of low-tempera- 
ture fluctuations due to sudden/unforeseen weather changes that could trigger self- 
seeds in hybrid seed production plots. In addition, the higher temperature fluctuations  
in self-seed multiplication plots could result in lower self-seed yields of the TGMS  
lines. Therefore, the right choice of locations based on historical agrometeorologi- 
cal data is essential to identify ideal places for hybrid rice seed production and self- 
seed multiplication. 

4      Physiological Characterization of the TGMS Trait 

Homozygous and true-breeding TGMS lines need to be physiologically character- 
ized, especially for CSTP and CFTP, besides determining the temperature-sensitive  
stage for sterility-fertility alteration. The deployment of TGMS lines needs to match  
the  target  location  requirements.  Furthermore,  precise  information  on  these  two  
indices is essential for choosing an appropriate source for the development of two- 
line hybrids (Ali et al.  1995). 

4.1      Determination of CSTP and CFTP  

The determination of CSTP and CFTP is essential for characterizing TGMS lines  
for their proper exploitation in target regions. CSTP pertains to the lowest mean  
temperature among the temperatures inducing sterility, while the highest mean tem- 
perature causing fertility is considered as the CFTP (Chandirakala et al. 2008; Latha  
and  Thiyagarajan  2010;  Sasikala  et  al.  2015;  Kadirimangalam  et  al.  2017).  The  
tracking technique (Ali et al.  1995) was used to identify the CSTP and CFTP based  
on  the  sensitive  stage  of  a  line.  Using  this  method,  the  CSTP  is  determined  by  
obtaining the lowest among the maximum temperatures of the three tracking dates  
coinciding with the sensitive stage of the three panicles that caused complete pollen  
sterility. At the same time, the CFTP is the temperature range in which the plants  
produced a higher proportion of fertile and unaborted sterile (partially stained) pol- 
len. Further studies by Vinodhini et al. (2019) considered the lowest value of the  
mean maximum temperature during the sensitive stage to determine the CSTP of a  
TGMS line. Viraktamath and Virmani (2001) proved that the maximum temperature  
is what influences the expression of fertility-sterility alteration of TGMS lines in  
tropical countries. Moreover, Kadirimangalam et al. (2017) identified TGMS lines  
with a CSTP at a mean temperature of above 29 °C. It is essential to understand that  

----------------------- Page 125-----------------------

Advances in Two-Line Heterosis Breeding in Rice via the Temperature-Sensitive...            113 

a given TGMS gene varies for its CSTP and CFTP when transferred to different  
genetic backgrounds (Sasikala et al.  2015). The fertility of PTGMS rice lines is  
affected by both temperature and light duration. Usually, PTGMS rice lines tend to  
produce  low  purity  of  hybrid  seeds  because  of  selfing  at  a  low  temperature  
(23–24 °C) in seed production. The spikelets of PTGMS lines during anthesis could  
not normally open at high temperature (HT,  ≥35 °C), thereby severely decreasing  
hybrid seed yields (Chen et al. 2020). This, along with other factors, makes PTGMS  
unfavorable for use in tropical conditions. However, PTGMS materials may still be  
useful in temperate conditions where day length is more crucial. 

4.1.1     Characterization Under Controlled-Temperature Screening  
         Conditions 

Sterile single-plant selections identified in a mutation population of the M  genera-2 
tion or selections from segregating materials derived from TGMS × pollen parent  
(PP) crosses need to be stubbled and screened at low temperature to check for fertil- 
ity reversion in the new emerging panicles. The crosses need to be bagged, and the  
generations correctly advanced under low-temperature facilities. At IRRI, the focus  
is on TGMS traits with low CSTP; thus, screening of the stable mutants and fixed  
materials is done under a phytotron in three mean temperature treatments (23, 24,  
and  25  °C)  to  determine  their  critical  temperature  for  sterility/fertility  induction  
(Fig. 2). This helped in identifying several TGMS lines with sterility at 24 °C and  
above and fertility at 23 °C. A few sterile plants were also identified in all three  
temperature conditions and are currently being evaluated for fertility reversion at  
<22 °C. Wongpatsa et al. (2014) carried out a similar study using two TGMS lines  
(KU-TGMS1 and KU-TGMS3) screened at the panicle initiation stage under growth  
chambers using day/night temperature parameters of 26/22 °C, 26/20 °C, 24/18 °C,  
and 22/20 °C, along with 11.5 h light/12.5 h dark periods and 75% relative humid- 
ity. Their results suggest that night temperatures of 18–22 °C induced maximum  
pollen viability and seed set. Furthermore, the highest seed rate was observed for  
KU-TGMS3 under 24/18 °C, peaking at 33.63%. In conclusion, this revealed that  
night  temperature  has  a  more  significant  effect  on  pollen  viability  than  day  
temperature. 

4.1.2     Field Screening Through Sequential Seeding 

The  physiological  characterization  of  fixed  TGMS  lines  can  also  be  carried  out  
through  continuous  seeding  or  sequential  sowing.  Sequential  seeding  is  done  in  
such a way that flowering is observed throughout the year at the candidate target  
sites  to  study  pollen  sterility  and  spikelet  sterility  (bagged  and  unbagged  condi- 
tions). Such studies help in evaluating the stability of promising TGMS lines and  
determining the sterile phase window for hybrid rice seed production. Based on the  
tracking method (Ali et al.  1995), one can determine the CSTP and the sensitive  

----------------------- Page 126-----------------------

114                                                                                        J. Ali et al. 

Fig. 2   Physiological characterization of TGMS lines in (a) plant growth facility bay, (b) cold- 
water facility, and (c) reach-in chamber 

stage for sterility. A study done by Ramakrishna et al. (2006) observed six TGMS  
lines planted in three staggered sowing at intervals of 10 days. The lines were seen  
over two different seasons, postrainy 2002 (October–December) for fertility rever- 
sion  with  lower  temperature  range  (25.5/16.1  °C)  and  prerainy  2003  (February– 
April) for sterility reversion with higher temperature range (35.7/23.8 °C), especially  
during the panicle initiation stage (Ramakrishna et al. 2006). Shuttle breeding of the  
selected sterile plants from segregating materials and their stubbles then transfers  
them to low-temperature conditions for obtaining self-seeds to advance the genera- 
tions under low-temperature conditions. It would help to identify suitable TGMS  
lines for such environments. At IRRI, the sterile plant stubbles are sent to Lucban  
and Benguet in the Philippines for self-seed multiplication and generation advance- 
ment. Likewise, researchers at Tamil Nadu Agricultural University, India, evaluated  
TGMS        lines    in    two     sterility-inducing      environments,        Coimbatore        and  
Sathiyamangalam,  during  rabi  season  starting  in  December  2013  and  2014. The  
same lines were stubble-planted and evaluated for pollen sterility in pollen fertility- 
inducing environments during kharif season in July 2013 and 2014 at the Hybrid  
Rice Evaluation Centre, Gudalur, a high altitude (1500 masl) with colder climate  
(Manonmani et al. 2016). Latha and Thiyagarajan (2010) also recommended a high- 
altitude area such as Gudalur for TGMS self-seed multiplication of lines such as  

----------------------- Page 127-----------------------

Advances in Two-Line Heterosis Breeding in Rice via the Temperature-Sensitive...                                                                           115 

TS29, which was observed to have only 16 days of fertile phase during December  
in Coimbatore. In Gudalur, TS29 had more than 60% pollen fertility and seed set  
when the mean temperature was 22 °C (28/17 °C) and below from June to November. 

4.2          Determination of the Critical Stage for Fertility-Sterility   
             Alteration 

The critical stages of panicle development sensitive to temperature could be deter- 
mined  from  the  stages  exhibiting  a  significant  correlation  with  pollen  sterility  
(Chandirakala et al. 2008). The stamen pistil primordial stage, which is 15–24 days  
before heading, was considered as the sensitive stage (Ali et al. 1995; Salgotra et al.  
2012). Furthermore, Viraktamath and Virmani (2001) found 4–8 days after panicle  
initiation  as  the  most  sensitive  stage.  For  the  lines  that  Latha  and  Thiyagarajan  
(2010) had examined, those were sensitive to temperature from stamen pistil pri- 
mordial differentiation to pollen ripening except for two lines that were sensitive  
from the meiotic division of the pollen mother cell to pollen ripening. The sensitive  
stages observed to vary with the four TGMS lines (TNAU 27S, TS 09 12, TS 09 15,  
and TS 09 25) showed a significant amount of positive correlation between pollen  
sterility and maximum and mean temperatures (Sasikala et al. 2015). The period of  
partial sterility was considered as the phase of fertility transition (Ali et al.  1995;  
Latha and Thiyagarajan  2010). Sanchez and Virmani (2005) observed differentia- 
tion of secondary branch primordium and the filling stage of pollen, that is, 24 to  
5 days before heading was considered a sensitive stage for temperature. The results  
showed that the critical stage for most of the TGMS lines occurred during panicle  
developmental                   stages          and        approximately                  26       to      5     days         before           heading  
(Kadirimangalam et al.  2017). Based on all these studies, we can demarcate the  
critical stage for sterility expression from 5 to 26 days before heading that coincides  
with the differentiation of secondary branch primordium and the filling stage of pol- 
len. These sensitive days before heading also varied with early-, medium-, and late- 
duration TGMS lines and depending on the synchronous flowering habit. 

4.3          Evaluation of TGMS Lines for Sterility-Fertility Alteration   
             in Different Environments 

TGMS-based two-line breeding programs require natural sites with low tempera- 
tures in higher altitudes in the tropics that are essential for advancing generations of  
selected TGMS lines. However, it will be worthwhile to select sterile plants with  
low CSTP in the range of 23–25 °C as they are stable under high-temperature condi- 
tions (28–30 °C) for sterility. A recent discovery at IRRI of A07 with low CSTP of  
24 °C is an excellent example of this type of TGMS line (Ali et al. 2018). Regular  

----------------------- Page 128-----------------------

116                                                                                                            J. Ali et al. 

self-seed multiplication of TGMS lines is carried out for their use in hybrid rice seed  
production plots under high-temperature conditions. IRRI has two locations (Lucban  
and Benguet) for self-seed multiplication in the Philippines. Multilocation trials for  
two-line hybrid rice seed reproducibility trials are essential for understanding the  
stability of the TGMS parental lines and their outcrossing features. 

4.4       Improvement of Outcrossing Traits in TGMS and Pollen   
          Parental Lines 

Outcrossing is directly correlated as a function of floral morphology and flowering  
behavior for the male-sterile parental line (Oka and Morishima  1967). The wider  
angle of lemma and palea correlated with greater exsertion and surface area of the  
stigma, leading to higher seed-set percentage. Visual phenotypic selection can be  
used  efficiently  to  identify  higher  seed-set  potential  (Ramakrishna  et  al.  2006;  
Salgotra et al. 2012). According to the standards set by Chen et al. (2010), female  
parents should possess a panicle exsertion rate of >70%, along with an excellent  
outcrossing rate, early and short flowering span, and well-closed lodicules and lem- 
mas after pollination. On the other hand, pollen parents should exhibit large anthers  
and pollen quantity, pollen vigor, and vigorous growth ability (Chen et al. 2010). 
     Better panicle exsertion from the sheath in male-sterile lines would help increase  
the number of spikelets for outcrossing than lines with incomplete panicle exsertion  
(Rahul Roy and Kumaresan 2019; Abeysekera et al. 2003; Virmani 1994). The lines  
with higher panicle exsertion percentage coupled with higher seed set and higher  
spikelet fertility percentage influence outcrossing ability and could be well exploited  
for the development of hybrid rice (Arasakesary et al. 2015). 
     Many of the traits for outcrossing in CMS, such as greater glume opening angle  
and more stigma exsertion, lead to higher seed setting (Mahalingam et al. 2013),  
which could be used as well for TGMS breeding. Outcrossing of relevant traits,  
especially the longer feathery stigma protrusion on either side of the lemma-palea  
and full glume opening, is highly attractive for increased pollination reception, ger- 
mination, and seed set. Developing synchronous flowering habits in TGMS lines is  
essential for successful seed production. At IRRI, a few long feathery stigma-pro- 
truding types of TGMS lines with synchronous flowering patterns were successfully  
identified (Fig. 3) (Ali et al. 2018). Similarly, at TNAU, the TGMS lines developed  
through  pedigree  breeding,  mutation  breeding,  and  identification  of  spontaneous  
mutants  in  the  breeding  material  were  addressing  the  market  requirements  for  
medium duration, better agronomic characteristics, and excellent floral traits and  
requirements such as high stigma exsertion, wider glume opening, and acceptable  
grain quality characteristics such as medium slender grain type, etc. (Manonmani  
et  al.  2016).  However,  the  outcrossing  traits  translating  into  higher  hybrid  seed  
yields need to be verified under hybrid seed production geographies. 

----------------------- Page 129-----------------------

Advances in Two-Line Heterosis Breeding in Rice via the Temperature-Sensitive...                                                117 

Fig. 3   Newly developed  
TGMS line with long  
feathery stigma 

     The floral traits of the pollen parents are also equally important to obtain higher  
seed setting. The pollen parents need to be highly diverse from the TGMS parental  
lines. At the same time, they need to possess floral traits similar to those of a restorer  
in the three-line system, especially in terms of plant height, profuse tillering, heavy  
pollen load, and pollen dehiscence. Moreover, the pollen parents should possess a  
staggered  flowering  habit  to  provide  good  pollen  dehiscence  during  hybrid  seed  
production. Consideration should be given to the synchrony of the timing of pollen  
dehiscence of pollen parents. It should match the TGMS parent’s spikelet opening,  
and stigma receptivity is essential. In addition, pollen parents need to possess all the  
market-required  traits  such  as  appropriate  grain  shape  and  quality,  abiotic  stress  
tolerance, and insect pest and disease resistance. 

5       Genetics of TGMS Lines 

The recent discovery of new low-CSTP TGMS lines that showed complete sterility  
at a mean temperature of 24 °C has sparked renewed interest in two-line hybrid rice  
technology. The genetics of the TGMS trait is essential for the exploitation of this  
technology. 

5.1        Identification of Genes Governing the TGMS Trait  

A single recessive nuclear gene governs the TGMS trait in TGMS lines (Hussain  
et al. 2012). So far, 13 TGMS genes and their alleles (tms1, tms2, tms3, tms4, tms5,  
tms6, tms6(t), tms7(t), tms8, tms9, tms9-1, tms10, and tmsX) found in 5460S, Norin  
PL 12, IR32364, SA 2, Annong S-1, SoKcho-MS, 0A15-1, UPRI-95-140TGMS,  
F61, Zhu1S, Hengnong S-1, japonica  cv. 9522, and Xian S, respectively, have been  
identified based on their allelic relationship as well as molecular marker studies.  
(Wang et al.  1995; Subudhi et al. 1997; Yamaguchi et al. 1997; Reddy et al. 2000;  

----------------------- Page 130-----------------------

                                                                                                                                                                                                                            1 
Table 2   Molecular markers associated with EGMS genes in rice (modified from Ali et al. 2018)                                                                                                                              1 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            8 

 Trait                 Gene            Source                         Chromosome           Closest flanking markers                             Distance (cM)      Reference 

 TGMS                  tms1            5460S                           8                   RZ562-RG978                                          6.7                Wang et al. ( 1995) 

                       tms2            Norin PL12                      7                   R643A-R1440 (D24156)                                 0.3                Yamaguchi et al. ( 1997) 

                                       Norin PL12                      7                   RM11-RM2                                             5.0, 16.0          Lopez et al. (2003) 

                                       KDML105                         7                   0s7g2690                                             15.4, 16.9         Pitnjam et al. (2008) 

                       tms3            IR32364S                        6                   OPAC3640-OPAA7550                                    7.7, 10.0          Subudhi et al. (1997) 

                                       IR32364S                        6                   F18F, F18RM, F18FM/F18RM                             2.7                Lang et al. ( 1999) 

                       tms4            TGMS-VN1                        2                   E5/M12600                                            3.3                Dong et al. (2000) 

                                       SA2                             9                   RM257, EAA/MCAG                                      6.2, 5.3           Reddy et al. (2000) 

                       tms5            Annong S-1                      2                   RM174, R394                                          0, 2.5             Jia et al. (2000) 

                                       Annong S-1                      2                   C365-1, G227-1                                       1.04, 2.08         Wang et al. (2003) 

                                       M105S                           2                   RM174                                                0                  Nas et al. (2005) 

                                       Annong S-1 and Y58S             2                   4039-1 and 4039-2                                    –                  Yang et al. (2007) 

                                       103S                            2                   RM3294, RM6378, RM7575 and RM71                      –                  Hien and Yoshimura (2015) 

                                       Annong S-1                      2                   dCAPS-172                                            –                  Song et al. (2016) 

                                       IR68301S                        2                   RM12676, 2gAP0050058                                                    Khlaimongkhon et al. (2019)                New 

                       tms6            Sokcho-MS                       5                   RM3351, E60663                                       0.1, 1.9           Lee et al. (2005) 

                       tms6(t)         0A15-1                          3                   S187-770                                             1.3                Wang et al. (2004) 

                                       UPRI 95-140TGMS                 3                   –                                                    –                  Li et al. (2005) 

                                       G20S                            10                  RM3152, RM4455                                       3.0, 1.10          Liu et al. (2010) 

                       tms7(t)         UPRI 95-140TGMS                 7                   –                                                    –                  Li et al. (2005) 

                       tms8            F61                             11                  RM21, RM224                                          4.3, 3.0           Hussain et al. (2012) 

                       tms9            Zhu1S                           2                   Indel 37, Indel 57                                   0.12, 0.31         Sheng et al. (2013) 

                                       Zhu1S                           2                   Indel 91, Indel 101                                  –                  Sheng et al. (2015) 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            J 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            . 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              
                       tms9-1          HengnongS-1                     9                   QY-9-19, QY-9-27                                     0.22, 0.07         Qi et al. (2014)                                         A 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            l 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            i 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              
                       tms10          japonica  cv. 9522               2                   Os02g18320                                                              Yu et al. (2017)                           New           e 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            t 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            a 
                       tmsX            XianS                           2                   RMAN81, RMX21                                        –                  Peng et al. (2010)                                       l 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            . 

----------------------- Page 131-----------------------

                                                                                                                                                                                                                   A 
Trait                 Gene           Source                        Chromosome         Closest flanking markers                            Distance (cM)     Reference                                              d 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   v 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   a 
PGMS/PTGMS           pms 1           32001S                        7                  RG477-RG511, RZ272                                  3.5–15.0          Zhang et al. ( 1994)                                   n 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   c 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   e 
                                                                                      RG477/R277, R1807                                   0.1, 6.0          Liu et al. (2001)                                      s 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   i 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   n 
                     pms 1(t)       Pei’ai64S                      7                  RM21242, YF11                                       0.2, 0.2          Zhou et al. (2011)                                       
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   T 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   w 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   o 
                     pms2            32001S                        3                  RG348, RG191                                        10.6, 7.0         Zhang et al. ( 1994) 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   - 
                     pms            Nongken 58S                    12                 RZ261/C751, R2708                                   5.5, 9.0          Mei et al. ( 1999)                                     L 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   i 
                          3 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   n 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   e 
                                    Nongken 58S                    12                 LJ47 and LJ265                                      0                 Lu et al. (2005), Ding et al. (2012)                     
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   H 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   e 
                     pms4           Mian 9S                        4                  RM6659, RM1305                                      3.0, 3.5          Huang et al. (2008)                                    t 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   e 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   r 
                     p/tms 12-1     Pei’ai64S                      12                 PA301, PAIDL2                                       –                 Zhou et al. (2012)                                     o 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   s 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   i 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   s 
                     ptgms           Guangzhan63S                  2                  S2-40, S2-44                                        0.08, 0.16        Xu et al. (2011)                                         
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   B 
                            2-1 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   r 
rTGMS                 rtms1         J207S                          10                 RM239-RG257                                         3.6, 4.0          Jia et al. (2001)                                      e 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   e 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   d 
rPGMS                 rpms          YiD1S                          8                  RM22980, RM23017                                    0.9, 1.8          Peng et al. (2008)                                     i 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   n 
                           1 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  g 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
                      rpms2         YiD1S                          9                  RM23898, YDS926                                     0.9, 0.9          Peng et al. (2008)                                     i 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   n 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
                      rpms3(t)      D52S                           10                 RM5271 and RM244                                    6.6, 4.6          Joseph et al. (2011)                                   R 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   i 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   c 
                      csa                                                                                                                                   Zhang et al. (2013)                                    e  
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   v 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   i 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   a 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   t 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   h 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   e 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   T 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   e 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   m 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  p 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   e 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   r 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   a 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   t 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   u 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   r 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   e 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   - 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   S 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   e 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   n 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   s 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   i 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   t 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   i 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   v 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   e 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   . 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   . 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   . 

                                                                                                                                                                                                                    1 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    1 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    9 

----------------------- Page 132-----------------------

120                                                                                                   J. Ali et al. 

Jia et al. 2000; Wang et al. 2004; Lee et al. 2005; Li et al. 2005; Peng et al. 2010;  
Hussain et al. 2012; Sheng et al. 2013; Qi et al. 2014; Yu et al. 2017) (Table 2). 
    The identified tms genes could be further exploited for developing TGMS pyra- 
miding lines by using two to three tms genes for improving stability during the ste- 
rility phase. However, only a few studies have been attempted on the pyramiding of  
these alleles, studying them for improving the stability of the TGMS lines (Nas  
et al. 2005). So far, 13 tms, seven pms, and three  rtms genes have been identified  
governing the EGMS trait that is spread across all 12 rice chromosomes. 
    The TGMS trait is governed by a single major gene and could have several modi- 
fier genes that exist in different backgrounds. Therefore, it is crucial to characterize  
the TGMS lines physiologically before their commercial exploitation. The TGMS  
trait is much easier to transfer to other backgrounds through the marker-assisted  
backcross (MABC) approach, and one has to take care of modifier genes as well that  
may  influence  trait  expression.  In  this  context,  it  is  essential  to  understand  the  
molecular function of the TGMS trait (Ding et al.  2012; Zhou et al. 2012; Wang  
et al. 2013; Pan et al. 2014; Kim and Zhang 2017; Mishra and Bohra 2018). 
    Earlier studies on TGMS focused on the physiological aspects and how the gene  
is phenotypically expressed in the population. However, the first genetic study to  
confirm the location of the TGMS gene was begun by Wang et al. ( 1995) using an  
F   cross  from  a  mutant  TGMS  line  (5460S)  and  Hong Wan  52.  Bulk  segregant 2 
analysis and QTL mapping using RAPD markers identified the first TGMS gene as  
TGMS1.2, located within chromosome 8 (Wang et al.  1995). Succeeding genetic  
studies  are  all  compiled  and  given  in Table  2  with  the  corresponding  molecular  
markers. 

5.2      Molecular Mechanisms of the TGMS Trait  

With the advent of new technologies in the field of genomics and transcriptomics,  
Luo et al. (2020) confirmed the location of the tms gene, which was begun by Wang  
et al. ( 1995), for the identification of tms1 on chromosome 8 using RFLP markers.  
This transition from RFLP to SSRs and more recently with transcriptomics in con- 
firming the tms1 loci led to the unraveling of the mechanism behind tms genes (Luo  
et al. 2020). Furthermore, Pan et al. (2014) showed that, in line TGMS-Co27, male  
sterility is based on the cosuppression of a UDP-glucose pyrophosphorylase gene  
(Ugp1), and the underlying molecular mechanisms need to be unraveled. Zhou et al.  
(2014) uncovered the molecular mechanism of rice tms5, which functions in RNase  
ZS1-mediated UbL40 mRNA regulation during pollen development. Under permis- 
sive (low) temperature conditions, the level of UbL40 mRNAs remains low in the  
tms5 mutant plants, allowing the production of normal pollen. However, at restric- 
tive (high) temperature, UbL40 mRNAs are not processed by RNase ZS1, which  
leads to their high-level accumulation, causing male sterility (Zhou et al.  2014).  
Wang et al. (2019) carried out a comparative quantitative proteomic analysis of the  
anthers of TGMS line Annong S-1 grown at permissive (low) (21 °C) and restrictive  

----------------------- Page 133-----------------------

Advances in Two-Line Heterosis Breeding in Rice via the Temperature-Sensitive...          121 

Fig. 4   Current breeding approaches for TGMS followed at IRRI 

(high) temperatures (>26 °C). The restrictive high temperatures resulted in 89 dif- 
ferentially accumulated proteins (DAPs) in the anthers as compared to permissive  
low-temperature conditions. Out of the 89 DAPs, 46 had increased abundance and  
43 had decreased abundance, which are distributed in most of the subcellular com- 
partments  of  anther  cells.  Most  have  catalytic  and  binding  molecular  functions.  
Moreover, the gene ontology analysis for biological processes done by Wang et al.  
(2019) indicated that high-temperature induction caused the fertility-sterility con- 
version. This mainly adversely affects the metabolism of protein, carbohydrate, and  
energy and decreases the abundance of vital proteins closely related to defense and  
stress. This further impedes the growth and development of the pollen and weakens  
the overall defense and stress ability of Annong S-1. 
   Li  et  al.  (2020)  carried  out  RNA-Seq  on  rice  TGMS  lines  at  the  microspore  
mother  cell  and  meiosis  stages  under  sterile  and  fertile  conditions  that  revealed  
1070 differentially expressed genes found to be enriched in protein folding, protein  
binding,  regulation  of  transcription,  transcription  factor  activity,  and  metabolic- 
related processes. They showed that hub genes (such as UbL40s) were predicted to  
interact with proteolysis-related genes and DNA-directed RNA polymerase subunit,  
and heat shock proteins (HSPs) interacted with kinases to play significant roles in  
regulating fertility alteration. Their study suggested that, besides UbL40s, DNA- 
directed RNA polymerase subunit, kinases, and HSPs might be involved in TGMS  
fertility alteration and could be applied for TGMS breeding (Li et al. 2020). Despite  
several of these in-depth studies, the TGMS trait mechanism still needs to be unrav- 
eled entirely for its immediate exploitation by breeders. 

----------------------- Page 134-----------------------

122                                                                                                              J. Ali et al. 

6       Breeding of TGMS and Pollen Parental Lines 

Two-line  breeding  strategies  for  TGMS  are  currently  carried  out  using  four  
approaches: (a) the use of mutagenesis to induce new tms gene mutants from current  
materials, (b) conventional crossing and pedigree selection, (c) introgression of cur- 
rently identified  tms genes into elite lines, and (d) pyramiding known  tms genes  
from different sources (Fig. 4). For each strategy, parental line selection remains the  
most crucial part to ensure hybrid vigor and address market segment requirements. 

6.1       Different Available Approaches to Breed TGMS Lines  

6.1.1       Mutation Breeding for the Identification of TGMS Mutants 

Mutation  breeding  for  the  development  of  TGMS  lines  was  first  reported  by  
Maruyama et al. ( 1991) for the development of Norin PL12 using gamma radiation.  
Furthermore, Ali  et  al.  ( 1995)  developed  and  characterized  several  TGMS  lines  
using chemical and physical mutagens. Interestingly, Ali and Siddiq ( 1999) also  
identified a spontaneous mutant (JP38s) that showed a reverse TGMS trait, behav- 
ing as sterile at lower temperatures (<24 °C) and as fertile at higher temperatures  
(>30.5 °C). IRRI began a mutation breeding program using chemical mutagens in  
2015 to discover new TGMS mutants, which are currently being characterized. The  
mutation populations in the M  generation need to be screened under high-temper-2 
ature conditions to identify complete male sterility, and these are then stubbled and  
taken  to  low-temperature  conditions  to  check  for  fertility  reversions.  Depending  
upon their seed settings in the stubbles, they are further generation advanced under  
low-temperature conditions to fix the TGMS mutants quickly. Upon fixation, these  
mutants are studied in different temperature regimes to characterize them physio- 
logically (Ali et al.  1995, 2020 Unpublished). 
     . 

6.1.2       Pedigree Breeding 

It is also essential to breed new materials through crossing TGMS parents with elite  
lines and selection in the F  generation for male-sterile single plants under high-2 
temperature conditions. At IRRI, conventional crosses were made with the TGMS  
line A07 as a pollinator and elite breeding materials as the female parents (Ali et al.  
2018). After the initial cross in the F  generation, the selected male-sterile single 2 
plants in high-temperature regimes are then stubbled and selfed seeds are produced  
under low-temperature conditions. These selected single plants are verified for the  
presence of the  tms5 gene across succeeding generations. Using this approach, a  
new TGMS line with the tms5 gene will be developed (Ali et al. 2020 Unpublished). 

----------------------- Page 135-----------------------

Advances in Two-Line Heterosis Breeding in Rice via the Temperature-Sensitive...              123 

6.1.3     Transfer from a Known TGMS Gene Source to Elite Lines 

Another strategy for integrating TGMS in two-line hybrid rice is by introgression of  
tms genes. At IRRI, the TGMS line A07 is used as a donor for introgressing the tms5  
gene into elite breeding materials by two backcrosses and selecting the progenies in  
BC F  onward for the  tms5 gene. By using foreground markers and high-density 2 2 
background SNP markers, introgression of the tms5 gene into elite materials is pos- 
sible. However, it is essential to accurately characterize these materials upon fixa- 
tion for their fertility-sterility alteration behavior. 

6.1.4     Pyramiding TGMS Genes for Better Stability 

Despite the independent successes in characterizing and isolating different TGMS  
genes in rice, only a few studies have dealt with the additive effect and pyramiding  
of different TGMS genes (Nas et  al.  2005). Two- and three-gene pyramids con- 
structed  using  the  three  TGMS  donors,  Norin  PL  12  (tms2),  SA2  (tgms),  and  
DQ200047-21 (tms5), possessing the RM11 allele of Norin PL 12, RM257 allele of  
SA2, and RM174 allele of DQ200047-21 were selected. As expected, all selected  
progenies were male-sterile in sterility-inducing conditions (Nas et al. 2005). The  
pyramids developed from this effort were designated as IR80775-46 (with tms2 and  
tms5) and IR80775-21 (with tms2, tgms, and tms5). Pyramiding tms genes is useful  
to improve the stability of the TGMS line and to widen the sterility phase. Currently,  
at  IRRI,  efforts  are  ongoing  to  pyramid  tms2  and  tms5  genes  to  understand  the  
mechanisms of the genes and to improve the stability of the TGMS trait. The current  

Fig. 5   New IRRI stable TGMS lines with low critical sterility temperature point at 24 °C 

----------------------- Page 136-----------------------

124                                                                                    J. Ali et al. 

Table 3   TGMS lines developed at IRRI (modified from Ali et al. 2018) 

 S. no.         TGMS line 
 1              A07 
 2              A32 
 3              A36 
 4              A37 
 5              IR75589-31-27-8-33-1 (TGMS) 
 6              IR68301-11-6-4-4-3-6-6 (TGMS) 
 7              IR73827-23-26-15-7 (TGMS) 
 8              IR73834-21-26-15-25-4 (TGMS) 
 9              IR75589-31-27-8-33 (TGMS) 
 10             IR77271-42-5-4-36 (TGMS) 

Fig. 6   New IRRI stable TGMS line with low critical sterility temperature point. (Source: Ali et al.  
2018) 

----------------------- Page 137-----------------------

Advances in Two-Line Heterosis Breeding in Rice via the Temperature-Sensitive...                                 125 

TGMS pyramiding studies at IRRI used line A07 as a pollinator parent (Ali et al.  
2020 Unpublished). 

6.2      Rapid Fixation of Segregating TGMS Lines  

Conventionally,  generation  advancement  is  accomplished  by  growing  the  plants  
under natural low-temperature locations, for example, Lucban-Quezon (14.0805°N,  
121.5427°E)   and   Tublay-Benguet   (16.50805°N,   120.63524°E).   This   method  
remains the most popular as it is the most cost-efficient and requires the least techni- 
cal work. This method, however, has its disadvantages as well. First, the environ- 
mental variables (temperature, humidity, and day length) at the location could cause  
genetic purities, mainly if fluctuations occurred during the plant’s panicle initiation.  
Second, it requires labor-intensive cultural management of the field to prevent pests  
and diseases, especially under higher altitude locations in the tropics. Regardless of  
the fixation method, marker-assisted selection (MAS) is integral to the generation  
advancement of TGMS lines. MAS ensures the integrity of the  tms gene and the  
genetic purity of the TGMS lines across generations. 
    Pedigree breeding and generation advancement of desirable TGMS segregants  
and mutants are challenging until the lines are correctly fixed. Recently, using new  
techniques of speed breeding under rapid generation advancement (RGA) facilities  
with specialized lighting, one can fix the segregating TGMS trait within 2–3 years,  
and this can be put to use to develop hybrid combinations. The use of the RGA  
method is a viable alternative to save on time and costs vis-à-vis field conditions.  
RGA hastens the fixation of new lines by advancing single seeds per line from a  
segregating population under controlled conditions (Collard et al. 2017). Instead of  
the usual dry and wet seasons, RGA allows several generations of advancement in  
a single season by growing the plants in trays instead of transplanting in the field to  
facilitate faster growth. Generations of TGMS breeding lines are advanced at low  
temperature  (<22  °C)  in  plant  growth  facility  (PGF)  chambers.  It  is  essential  to  
maintain the critical temperature and humidity necessary to induce pollen fertility  
and self-seed setting in plants, thus requiring more labor costs, a PGF, and technical  
expertise. 
    To speed up the fixation of TGMS traits in the mutants and segregants, one can  
use a doubled-haploid (DH) approach. It is essential to identify the right segregants  
and mutants for fixation through the DH approach (Fig.  5). Many times, the DH  
TGMS lines, once fixed, may not be the ideal ones to match the market require- 
ments. IRRI has previously developed four TGMS lines using DH technology: A07,  
A36, A32, and A37 (Ali et al. 2018) (Table 3). Among them, A07 has already been  
validated as highly stable and it has a low CSTP of 24 °C (Fig. 6). 
    Moreover, the tms gene present in this line (tms5) is the most extensively studied  
tms gene and it is used in different breeding programs as well (Wang et al.  2003;  
Nas et al. 2005; Yang et al. 2007; Kadirimangalam et al. 2019). Finally, DH technol- 
ogy offers the best potential among the three approaches. The use of DH technology  

----------------------- Page 138-----------------------

126                                                                                                 J. Ali et al. 

ensures the fastest method of fixing recombinant genotypes, encompassing six gen- 
erations of population advancement typically required to fix the population in just a  
single season (Yao et al. 2018). Moreover, the use of DHs eliminates the presence  
of deleterious alleles and background noise, which are typically observed in a natu- 
ral population. 

6.3      Breeding Pollen Parents  

Heterotic pool-based breeding of pollen parents, more diverse and distinct from the  
TGMS pool, is required. These materials need to be improved within the pool and  
avoid contamination from materials nearer the TGMS heterotic pool. Breeders need  
to select for the target traits that help in pollen dehiscence, staggering flowering  
characteristics,   and   heavy   tillering   to   provide   a   continuous   pollen   supply.  
Furthermore, the pollen parents need to address market segment needs so that the  
hybrids developed fit well. Pedigree breeding, single seed descent with genomic  
selection, along with RGA approaches could help to speed up the pollen parental  
breeding process. Specific traits such as genes with resistance against major insect  
pests and diseases that address market segment needs could be incorporated through  
a marker-assisted backcross (MABC) breeding approach. 

6.4       Two-Line indica/japonica Hybrids 

The two-line system is ideal for exploiting  indica/japonica hybrids as there is no  
barrier for the identification of pollen parents, which could be any parent other than  
the TGMS parent. The TGMS gene could preferably be in the indica parental back- 
ground, and with the use of a wide-compatibility (WC) gene in any one of the par- 
ents,  one  could  develop  indica/japonica  hybrids.  Shukla  and  Pandey  (2008)  
suggested brighter prospects of combining improved japonica  and tropical japonica  
germplasm having WC genes with indica TGMS lines for the exploitation of inter- 
subspecific heterosis. Recently, with the discovery of reliable WC gene-based mark- 
ers,  ones  such  as  S5  could  be  highly  useful  for  selection  to  combine  with  tms  
gene-based markers. At IRRI, the S5 gene from different sources is backcrossed into  
TGMS line A07. Hybrid rice seed production of intersubspecific hybrids may be  
challenging due to the varying timing of spikelet opening and pollination of the two  
subspecies, especially in tropical environments. So, we need to carefully identify  
parental lines from these two subspecies closer to each other. 

----------------------- Page 139-----------------------

Advances in Two-Line Heterosis Breeding in Rice via the Temperature-Sensitive...              127 

7     Breeding Two-Line Hybrids 

Two-line  rice  hybrids  have  higher  heterosis  than  three-line  rice  hybrids  as  any  
nonTGMS  line  could  be  used  as  a  pollen  parent,  thus  creating  more  extensive  
opportunities.  Unlike  the  three-line  system,  CMS  requires  only  restorers  with  
restorer fertility (Rf) genes to restore fertility in the F  hybrid. Thus, it is a much 1 
narrower range within which heterosis needs to be exploited. On the other hand,  
TGMS-based two-line hybrids open up more opportunities to use the intersubspe- 
cific hybrids (indica/japonica) as the japonica  subspecies has a low frequency of  
restorer genes. At IRRI, all source nurseries are genotyped, and heterotic pools are  
formed based on the genetic distances. Heterotic pool-based breeding is being fol- 
lowed to identify the best combinations for the two-line hybrids. To improve the  
heterotic pools, we have to make crosses within the pool. There is a need to maintain  
different heterotic pools carefully and to avoid contamination from other heterotic  
pools.  To  develop  new  heterotic  hybrids,  we  can  attempt  crosses  between  dis- 
tant pools. 

Fig. 7   IR134554H, a multiple-stress-tolerant two-line rice hybrid developed at IRRI 

----------------------- Page 140-----------------------

                                                                                                                                                                                            1 
Table 4   Performance of hybrids over the best inbreds and hybrids at IRRI-South Asia Hub, Hyderabad, in WS 2018, and at ISARC-Varanasi in kharif 2019                                      2 
                                                                                                                                                                                            8 
                    IRRI-South Asia Hub, Hyderabad (WS2018)                                                                                  ISARC Varanasi (kharif 2019) 
                                                                                                                 Yield advantage (%)                     Yield advantage (%)  
                                                                                                                 over check                              over check 
                                                                          Total                      Total                                   Total       Arize           Sava127  
                                   Plant     Panicle                      spikelets     Spikelet     grain       US337       MTU1010         grain       6444Gold        Pro  
                   Days to        height     length      Productive       per           fertility    yield       (comm.      (best           yield       (hybrid         (hybrid  
 Designation        flowering      (cm)      (cm)        tillers (no.)    panicle       (%)          (kg/ha)     hybrid)     variety)        (kg/ha)     check)          check) 
 IR134554 H         101             92        21          12                158          80            7767.0    10.0        21.0              7956.7    6.4             12.9 
 IR81958H           92              94        22          12                161          78            7638.0    8.0         19.0              7987.0    6.8             13.4 
 (Mestiso 77) 
 IR90872 H          95              88        22          18                173          79            7532.0    7.0         17.0              7606.0    1.7             8.0 
 IR81265H           92              84        23          16                199          84            7164.0    2.0         11.0              7704.7    3.1             9.4 
 (Mestiso 61) 
 IR82391H           95              88        21          13                163          78            6885.0    −2.0        7.0               7790.7    4.2             10.6 
 (Mestiso 68) 
 IR121020 H         87              78        20          13                153          79            6218.0    −12.0       −3.0              7040.7    −5.8            −0.1 
 IR106638 H         94              80        22          14                201          82            6153.0    −13.0       −4.0              7746.3    3.6             10.0 
 IR106616 H         90              85        22          12                221          83            6032.0    −14.0       −6.0              7676.0    2.7             9.0 
 IR81255H           91              83        21          16                199          81            5947.0    −16.0       −8.0              7818.3    4.6             11.0 
 (Mestiso 89) 
 IR82386H           93              82        22          13                168          68            5477.0    −22.0       −15.0             7927.0    6.0             12.5 
 (Mestiso 71) 
 DRR DHAN           83              81        21          13                157          76            3398.0    –           –               –           –               – 
 44 
 US 312             102             87        21          12                148          71            6881.0    −2.0        7.0             –           –               – 
                                                                                                                                                                                            J 
                                                                                                                                                                                            . 
 US 382             106             95        20          11                169          77            6756.0    −4.0        5.0             –           –               – 
                                                                                                                                                                                              
                                                                                                                                                                                            A 
 US 337             94             101        23          11                187          73            7051.0    0.0         10.0            –           –               –                  l 
                                                                                                                                                                                            i 
                                                                                                                                                                                              
                                                                                                                                                                                            e 
                                                                                                                                                                                            t 
                                                                                                                                                                                              
 MTU 1010           89              93        21          16                196          80            6436.0    −9.0        0.0             –           –               – 
                                                                                                                                                                                            a 
                                                                                                                                                                                            l 
                                                                                                                                                                                            . 

----------------------- Page 141-----------------------

                                                                                                                                                                                                A 
                                                                                                                                                                                                d 
                                                                                                                                                                                                v 
                   IRRI-South Asia Hub, Hyderabad (WS2018)                                                                                      ISARC Varanasi (kharif 2019)                    a 
                                                                                                                                                                                                n 
                                                                                                                                                                                                c 
                                                                                                                   Yield advantage (%)                      Yield advantage (%)                 e 
                                                                                                                                                                                                s 
                                                                                                                                                                                                  
                                                                                                                                                                                                i 
                                                                                                                                                                                                n 
                                                                                                                   over check                               over check 
                                                                                                                                                                                                  
                                                                                                                                                                                                T 
                                                                                                                                                                                                w 
                                                                           Total                       Total                                    Total       Arize           Sava127  
                                                                                                                                                                                                o 
                                                                                                                                                                                                 - 
                                  Plant      Panicle                       spikelets     Spikelet      grain       US337       MTU1010          grain       6444Gold        Pro  
                                                                                                                                                                                                L 
                   Days to        height     length       Productive       per           fertility     yield       (comm.      (best            yield       (hybrid         (hybrid             i 
                                                                                                                                                                                                n 
                                                                                                                                                                                                e 
Designation        flowering       (cm)       (cm)        tillers (no.)    panicle       (%)           (kg/ha)     hybrid)     variety)         (kg/ha)     check)          check)                
                                                                                                                                                                                                H 
                                                                                                                                                                                                e 
Arize 6129         –              –          –            –                –             –             –           –           –                7249.3      −3.0            2.9                 t 
                                                                                                                                                                                                e 
                                                                                                                                                                                                r 
Gold (hybrid                                                                                                                                                                                    o 
                                                                                                                                                                                                s 
                                                                                                                                                                                                i 
check)                                                                                                                                                                                          s  
                                                                                                                                                                                                B 
                                                                                                                                                                                                r 
                                                                                                                                                                                                e 
VNR 2355           –              –          –            –                –             –             –           –           –                6636.0      −11.2           −5.8 
                                                                                                                                                                                                e 
Plus (hybrid                                                                                                                                                                                    d 
                                                                                                                                                                                                i 
                                                                                                                                                                                                n 
check)                                                                                                                                                                                         g 
                                                                                                                                                                                                  
                                                                                                                                                                                                i 
                                                                                                                                                                                                n 
Super Moti         –              –          –            –                –             –             –           –           –                6617.3      −11.5           −6.1                  
                                                                                                                                                                                                R 
                                                                                                                                                                                                i 
(hybrid                                                                                                                                                                                         c 
                                                                                                                                                                                                e 
                                                                                                                                                                                                  
                                                                                                                                                                                                v 
check) 
                                                                                                                                                                                                i 
                                                                                                                                                                                                a 
BPT 5204           –              –          –            –                –             –             –           –           –                6499.3      −13.1           −7.8                  
                                                                                                                                                                                                t 
                                                                                                                                                                                                h 
(inbred check)                                                                                                                                                                                  e 
                                                                                                                                                                                                  
                                                                                                                                                                                                T 
                                                                                                                                                                                                e 
                                                                                                                                                                                                m 
Sarju 52           –              –          –            –                –             –             –           –           –                5559.3      −25.6           −21.1 
(inbred check)                                                                                                                                                                                 p 
                                                                                                                                                                                                e 
                                                                                                                                                                                                r 
                                                                                                                                                                                                a 
                                                                                                                                                                                                t 
MTU 7029           –              –          –            –                –             –             –           –           –                6958.0      −6.9            −1.2 
                                                                                                                                                                                                u 
                                                                                                                                                                                                r 
(inbred check)                                                                                                                                                                                  e 
                                                                                                                                                                                                 - 
                                                                                                                                                                                                S 
                                                                                                                                                                                                e 
Arize 6444         –              –          –            –                –             –             –           –           –                7476.7      0.0             6.1 
                                                                                                                                                                                                n 
Gold (hybrid                                                                                                                                                                                    s 
                                                                                                                                                                                                i 
                                                                                                                                                                                                t 
                                                                                                                                                                                                i 
check)                                                                                                                                                                                          v 
                                                                                                                                                                                                e 
                                                                                                                                                                                                . 
                                                                                                                                                                                                . 
Sava 127 pro       –              –          –            –                –             –             –           –           –                7045.3      −5.8            0.0                 . 
(hybrid  
check) 

                                                                                                                                                                                                 1 
                                                                                                                                                                                                 2 
                                                                                                                                                                                                 9 

----------------------- Page 142-----------------------

130                                                                                             J. Ali et al. 

7.1       Combining Ability Nurseries 

The general combining ability (GCA) of an inbred is its average performance across  
a series of hybrid combinations, and it is primarily due to the additive effects of  
genes. The GCA effects of the parental lines help in the identification of suitable  
parental lines (Chandirakala et al.  2012). The most promising TGMS lines devel- 
oped in high combining ability backgrounds could be used to further identify and  
validate their general combining ability. For this, a line × tester design could be used  
to identify high GCA of lines. This also allows identifying combinations with high  
specific combining ability that could be immediately exploited. A combining ability  
nursery needs to be regularly created to identify TGMS lines with high GCA and  
pollen parents from the breeding pipelines. Chen et al. (2010) stressed the impor- 
tance  of  identifying  PTGMS  with  high  combining  ability  as  this  is  the  basis  of  
robust heterotic hybrid rice varieties. Cao and Zhao (2014) showed that successful  
hybrids  are  directly  determined  by  the  combining  ability  of  the  sterile  line,  and  
sterile lines with high GCA have higher chances to produce heterotic combinations.  
In situations with poor GCA of TGMS lines, it is good to have pollen parents with  
high GCA to develop heterotic hybrids. Shukla and Pandey (2008), with a broad set  
of line × tester crosses, found that the parents with good GCA did not always pro- 
duce the best hybrid combinations due to a lack of higher-order additive interaction,  
and they suggested evaluating the specific combinations. They found TGMS line  
365-8S to be the best general combiner for all six traits: grain yield, panicle length,  
grain  number  per  panicle,  earliness  in  flowering,  panicle  number  per  plant,  and  
1000-grain weight. 

7.2      Breeding Trials  

Once  hybrid  combinations  are  identified,  small-scale  seed  production  either  by  
hand crosses or in field conditions should be sufficient to carry out an observation  
yield trial (OYT). An OYT evaluation of the F s under best management conditions 1 
would  allow  the  identification  of  good  performing  hybrids,  and  these  should  be  
forwarded to an advanced yield trial (AYT) in a larger plot size with proper replica- 
tions and the best market checks. Simultaneously, the AYT is screened for resis- 
tances  to  insect  pests  and  diseases.  The  highly  performing  hybrids  should  be  
identified  and  sent  for  grain  quality  evaluation.  Based  on  all  the  data,  the  best  
hybrids need to be produced in large quantities and also evaluated for their hybrid  
seed reproducibility for ensuring their success when screened in multienvironment  
trials (METs). The best candidate hybrids tested under METs lay the foundation for  
the identification of the best hybrids for a given target location and market segment.  
IRRI conducted two demonstration trials in India to evaluate the performance of  
some  newly  developed  two-line  hybrids.  One  hybrid  (IR134554H)  performed  
exceedingly well at both Hyderabad and Varanasi (Table 4, Fig. 7). 

----------------------- Page 143-----------------------

Table 5   Market needs segment per region for hybrid rice                                                                                                                                                                 A 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          d 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          v 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          a 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          n 
                                                                         Yield  
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          c 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          e 
                                                                         advantage    Yield  
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          s 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            
                                          Potential                      over best     advantage                  Plant     Key              Key                               Producibility      Key gaps in             i 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          n 
                Product       Duration    hybrid area     Core target    hybrid        over best    Check         height    defensive        agronomic                         benchmark          the present               
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          T 
 Countries      concept       (days)      (m ha)          geography      (%)           OPV (%)      variety       (cm)      traits           traits           Grain quality    (yield/ha)         products                w 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          o 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          - 
 India          Mid-early     110–125     8               PUN,           5–8           15–20        MTU1010       110–      Blast, neck      High vigor,      HRR:             >3.0 t/ha,         Lack of                 L 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          i 
                segment                                   HAR, CG,                                  and US        120       blast,* BLB,     >85%             55–65%           staggering         stress-tolerant         n 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          e 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            
                                                          CU, JH,                                   312                     BPH, false       spikelet         MRR: >70%        <15 days           materials,              H 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          e 
                                                          MP, GJ,                                   (inbred)                smut,* stem      fertility,       AC: 18–24%                          producibility,          t 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          e 
                                                          AS, UP,                                                           borer,*          non-lodging,     LS                                  lodging,*               r 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          o 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          s 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          i 
                                                          WB, KAR,                                                          drought          cold tolerant                                        false smut* 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          s 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            
                                                          W, C,                                                             tolerant         (seedling),                                                                  B 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          r 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          e 
                                                          Assam                                                                              MTU 1010 &  
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          e 
                                                                                                                                             IET 4786                                                                     d 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          i 
                                                                                                                                             grain type,                                                                  n 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         g 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            
                                                                                                                                             fine grain                                                                   i 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          n 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            
 Bangladesh     MS grain      125–140     4               Sylhet,        10           20 (>9.0 t/   BRRI          90–       BLB, SB,         High vigor,      MS with          >3.0 t/ha,         Lack of                 R 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          i 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          c 
                segment                                   Dhaka,                      ha)           dhan          100       BPH              spikelet         high amylose     staggering         stress-tolerant         e 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            
                (boro)                                    Chittagong,                               81(inbred)                               fertility, cold  (>24%),          <15 days           materials               v 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          i 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          a 
                                                          Rajshahi,                                 BRRI                                     tolerant,        milling                             (salinity,                
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          t 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          h 
                                                          Ranpur,                                   dhan 5                                   Jeerasail        (>65%)                              drought, cold,          e 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            
                                                          Khulna,                                   (hybrid)                                 grain type                                           diseases,               T 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          e 
                                                          Barisal                                                                            (>85%)                                               insects                 m 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         p 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          e 
                                                          Divisions 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          r 
                Mid-early     115–120     2                              10           20 (>7.0 t/   BRRI          100–      False smut,*     High vigor,      Slender grain    >3.0 t/ha,         Lack of  
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          a 
                segment                                                               ha)           dhan 49       110       BLB              spikelet         with high        staggering         stress-tolerant         t 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          u 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          r 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          e 
                (T. aman)                                                                           (inbred)                                 fertility,       amylose          <10 days           materials  
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          - 
                                                                                                    BRRI                                     early, drought   (>24%),                             (salinity,              S 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          e 
                                                                                                    Hybrid 6                                 tolerant,        milling                             drought, cold,          n 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          s 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          i 
                                                                                                    (hybrid)                                 BRRI dhan49      outturn                             submergence,            t 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          i 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          v 
                                                                                                                                             grain type       (>65%)                              stagnation at           e 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          . 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          . 
                                                                                                                                             (>85%)                                               15–30-cm                . 
                                                                                                                                                                                                  depths,  
                                                                                                                                                                                                  diseases,  
                                                                                                                                                                                                  insects) 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           1 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           3 
                                                                                                                                                                                                   (continued)             1 

----------------------- Page 144-----------------------

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   1 
Table 5   (continued)                                                                                                                                                                                                              3 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   2 

                                                                            Yield  
                                                                            advantage     Yield  
                                            Potential                       over best     advantage                    Plant     Key              Key                                  Producibility      Key gaps in  
                 Product       Duration     hybrid area     Core target     hybrid        over best     Check          height    defensive        agronomic                           benchmark           the present  
 Countries       concept       (days)       (m ha)          geography       (%)           OPV (%)       variety        (cm)      traits           traits             Grain quality     (yield/ha)         products 

 Philippines     Mid-early      95–115      2               Region 1,       5             15–20         NSIC Rc        ≥100      BLB, BPH,        Stability,         AC 17–24%,        ≥2.5 t/ha          Susceptible to  
                 segment                                    Region 3,                                   222                      blast, stem      more tillers,      >55% HRR,                            SB, poor  
                                                            Region                                      (inbred)                 borer,* RTV,     uniform grain      >65% MRR,                            standability,  
                                                            4A/4B                                       Mestiso 3                non-lodging      maturity,          LS, less                             yield coupled  
                                                                                                        (hybrid)                                  non-lodging,       chalk, slight                        with GQ,  
                                                                                                                                                  non-               aroma                                BLB, BPH,  
                                                                                                                                                  shattering                                              low HRR,  
                                                                                                                                                                                                          susceptibility  
                                                                                                                                                                                                          to fungal  
                                                                                                                                                                                                          diseases 

 Indonesia       Mid-late      120–130      2               Bali,           ≥10           ≥20           Ciherang       90–       Blast, neck      More               AC 18–22%,        >2.5 t/ha,         RSV-BPH,  
                 segment                                    Central                                     (inbred)       115       blast,* BLB,     productive         low-med GT,       staggering         BLB, blast,  
                                                            Java, East                                  Hipa 18,                 BPH, false       tillers, more      soft GC,          <10 days,          drought 
                                                            Java, Aceh,                                 Hipa 20                  smut,* stem      filled grains,     >50% HRR,        high OCR  
                                                            South                                       (hybrid)                 borer,*          lodging tol.,      >65% MRR,         (>50%) 
                                                            Sulawesi,                                                            drought          wide               <10%  
                                                            Lampung                                                              tolerant,        adaptability,      chalkiness,  
                                                                                                                                 RTV, BPH,        threshability      good  
                                                                                                                                 RRSV/                               palatability,  
                                                                                                                                 RGSV                                transluscent,  
                                                                                                                                                                     S-LS 

 Vietnam         Medium          >          2046.1 t/ha     North           1–5           >20           Nhị Ưu         110–      BLB, BPH         Yield              Intermediate      >2.5 t/ha          LS grain  
                 segment       110–130                                                                  838,           120                                           AC, high                             hybrid with  
                                                                                                        Thien uu,                                                    HRR, low                             BLB, BPH,  
                                                                                                        BC 15                                                        chalk                                SB traits 
                                                                                                        (inbreds)  
                 Early          85–105      1.4 mt          South &         1–3           <20                          110–      BLB, BPH         Very early         Intermediate      >2.5 t/ha          LS grain  
                                                                                                        TH3–3  
                 segment                    (early/LS)      Central                                                    120                                           AC, high                             hybrid with              J 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   . 
                                                                                                        (hybrid)                                                                                                                     
                                                                                                                                                                     HRR, low                             BLB & BPH                A 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   l 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   i 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
                                                                                                                                                                     chalk                                traits 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   e 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   t 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   a 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   l 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   . 

----------------------- Page 145-----------------------

Advances in Two-Line Heterosis Breeding in Rice via the Temperature-Sensitive...                               133 

7.3      Insect Pest and Disease Resistance  

Two-line rice hybrid yield potential could be fully realized by incorporating resis- 
tance to major diseases and insect pests (bacterial leaf blight (BLB), blast (BL),  
false smut (FS), sheath blight (SHB), tungro, green leafhopper (GLH), brown plan- 
thopper (BPH), stem borer, leaf folder, and gall midge). Most insect pest and dis- 
ease resistances are governed by major genes and could be easily introgressed into  
parental lines depending on market segment requirements. Two-line breeding offers  
better opportunities to convert the TGMS parent to acquire disease and insect pest  
resistance as compared to a CMS/maintainer parent, which is more cumbersome  
and requires more time (Ali et al. 2018). In this regard, IRRI has developed a global  
product concept addressing different market needs, which could be useful, require  
fewer resources, and result in higher impact. Researchers at Huazhong Agricultural  
University (HAU) introgressed Xa7, Xa21 , and Xa23 genes into C815S, a popular  
TGMS parental line, to develop five BLB-resistant cultivars: Hua1005S, Hua1002S,  
Hua 1009S, Hua 1006S, and Hua1001S (Jiang et al. 2015). Two-line hybrids with  
Xa23 showed a resistance reaction to seven Xanthomonas oryzae pv. oryzae (Xoo)  
strains. Hua1006S was the most promising TGMS parent among them with a higher  
degree of resistance based on Xa23 besides better plant type and grain quality fea- 
tures (Jiang et al. 2015). Currently, at IRRI, introgression of BLB and blast resis- 
tance  genes  into  elite  TGMS  and  pollen  parental  lines  is  carried  out  through  
marker-assisted selection. 

7.4       Grain Quality Considerations Addressing Market Needs 

A wider array of heterotic two-line rice hybrids opens up better options for develop- 
ing customized grain quality that caters to market needs (Table 5). IRRI’s two-line  
rice hybrid Mestiso 61 with good grain quality matched the market needs of the  
Philippines. It was successfully licensed to SL Agritech Company in the Philippines  
with limited exclusivity for a 6-year period. However, it is still available for license  
to the private seed industry for other countries under the Hybrid Rice Development  
Consortium. This hybrid gave an average yield of 6.7 t/ha during the dry season and  
6.4 t/ha during the wet season across the Philippines. The yield potential of this  
hybrid was nearly 10 t/ha, with 55% head rice recovery and amylose content of  
20.5%, ideally fitting Philippine market needs. We developed a strategy to breed and  
customize  grain  quality  as  per  market  requirements  (Allahgholipour  et  al.  2006;  
Pang et al.  2016). In this approach, breeders identify good-quality lines that will  
cater  to  the  varied  interests  of  consumers  across  rice-consuming  countries  by  
screening the breeding materials for eating and cooking quality (ECQ) and keeping  
the popularly preferred good-quality varieties as controls in the study. Furthermore,  
work  is  ongoing  to  identify  advanced  rice  breeding  lines/cultivars  with  similar  
apparent amylose content (AAC), gelatinization temperature (GT), and rapid vis- 

----------------------- Page 146-----------------------

134                                                                                                         J. Ali et al. 

cosity analysis (RVA), properties like those of the popular high-quality rice variet- 
ies, through simple cluster analysis. A two-line hybrid from China, Pei-Liang-you  
1108, has relatively good ECQ, and through our study, we identified seven lines in  
the HC21 cluster clade with similar AAC, GT, and RVA and hence with comparable  
ECQ. Likewise, another two-line hybrid with good ECQ, Jin-ke-you651, allowed us  
to identify 11 hybrid lines within the HC18 cluster clade that had similar AAC, GT,  
and ECQ (Pang et al. 2016). 
    It is essential to develop rice hybrids with better ECQ that address market needs,  
paving the way for the expansion and adoption of rice hybrids in Asia and Africa.  
Higher hybrid rice yields have no value if they do not translate into higher percent- 
age head rice recovery (>55%), leading to increased farmers’ income. 

8       Seed Production Challenges 

Two-line  hybrid  rice  technology  largely  depends  on  the  identification  of TGMS  
lines that need to be multiplied under low-temperature conditions, and hybrid rice  
seed production requires a minimum of 2 weeks of stable high temperature to reach  
the sterile phase. To achieve these two different aspects of seed production carefully,  
we have different approaches to identify appropriate locations based on agrometeo- 
rological data. However, this needs validation before large-scale seed production. 

Key Challenges 
•   Addressing market requirements for different target places varies: for example,  
    long-duration hybrids for the Indian market segment may require a longer dura- 
    tion of TGMS and pollen parents. 
•   Identification and exploitation of hybrid rice seed production and TGMS self- 
     seed multiplication sites. 
•   Development of usable and stable TGMS parental lines matching market seg- 
    ment requirements. 
•   The relative heterosis of two-line rice hybrids needs to be superior to that of the  
    existing best three-line hybrids in the market. 
•   Two-line hybrid rice technology should assure lower seed costs on account of  
    better hybrid seed reproducibility rates of 3 t/ha and higher self-seed multiplica- 
    tion rates (>4.5 t/ha), making this seed feasible for use by farmers. 

8.1       Identification of Ideal Locations for Self-Seed   
          Multiplication of TGMS and Hybrid Rice Seed Production 

TGMS-based two-line hybrid rice technology mainly depends on the identification  
of suitable areas for both self–seed multiplication and hybrid rice seed production  
(Table  6).  Earlier,  a  systematic  analysis  of  50  years  of  agrometeorological  data  

----------------------- Page 147-----------------------

Advances in Two-Line Heterosis Breeding in Rice via the Temperature-Sensitive...            135 

helped  in  the  identification  of  appropriate  sites  in  India  (Siddiq  and Ali  1999).  
Interestingly, the authors identified places located in India between 500 and 700 m  
above sea level from May to September for both hybrid seed and self-seed multipli- 
cation  of  the  TGMS  lines.  Furthermore,  through  experimental  validation,  these  
places were confirmed as suitable for hybrid rice seed production, TGMS seed mul- 
tiplication, and locations ideal for both operations (Siddiq and Ali  1999). 
    Critical considerations for the choice of place could be the hills, coastal plains,  
or  interior  plains,  keeping  within  the  physiological  sterility  limits  of  <40  °C  to  
>16 °C. The Two-line Hybrid Rice Research Station was established under Tamil  
Nadu Agricultural University in the Nilgiris hills at 1200 m above sea level in a  
place known as Gudalur as early as 1995 in India (Soundararaj et al. 2002). Male- 
sterile TGMS selections at high temperatures at Trichy were made and immediately  
sent as stubbles to Gudalur to allow their self-seed multiplication and generation  
advancement. The most suitable time for matching the temperature conducive to  
self-fertility was from June to November. Shuttle breeding helped to identify 15  
highly stable TGMS lines with better stigma exsertion of 40–66%, and many are in  
the pipeline. Nearly 800 ha of paddy lands are available for commercial self-seed  
multiplication of promising TGMS lines (Soundararaj et al. 2002). In the Philippines,  
Lucban, Nueva Vizcaya, and Benguet are all identified as highly suitable for self- 
seed multiplication of TGMS lines. In Nueva Vizcaya, the mean temperature from  
the beginning of October to the end of February in the next year is less than 22 °C,  
making it a suitable place to reproduce TGMS line seed. The mean temperature at  
Lucban from January to February was <23 °C, and so all the TGMS lines possessing  
a CFTP of <23 °C could be multiplied at Lucban. The TGMS lines should be com- 
pletely male sterile to ensure the safety of hybrid seed production. Interestingly, we  
observed that the mean temperature at IRRI, Los Baños, was higher than 25 °C  
almost all year. So, the CSTP of fertility-sterility alteration of TGMS lines in the  
Philippines could be set at >24 °C for ensuring completely safe hybrid seed produc- 
tion, especially from April to June. 
   Pollen of A07 was partially fertile to completely sterile at Lucban as observed  
from 5 May to 17 June and completely sterile (with no pollen type) at Los Baños.  
A07 possesses a lower CFTP to turn completely fertile at <24 °C. A07 seeds pro- 
duced in Nueva Vizcaya are possible where lower temperature prevails as compared  
to Lucban (Ali et al. 2020 Unpublished). Recently, with GIS technologies, IRRI has  
successfully  identified  a  suitable  choice  of  sites  for  hybrid  seed  production  and  
TGMS self-seed multiplication based on 20 years of agrometeorological data. The  
potential GIS maps for the Philippines, identifying the places suitable for self-seed  
multiplication and hybrid rice seed production, are shown in Fig. 8. A map with a  
0.08° spatial resolution and limited climatic data from 2010 to 2018 was used to  
avoid results affected by climate change trends. The following assumptions were  
used  for  locations  selected  based  on  temperature  meeting  a  stable  criterion  for  
28  days  minimum  each  year,  especially  for  hybrid  seed  production:  (a)  average  
daily  temperature  of  >28  °C  and  ≤36  °C  and  (b)  a  minimum  temperature  of  
>24 °C. Likewise, for TGMS self-seed multiplication, a criterion of average tem- 
perature of <24 °C and Tmin >16 °C was used. 

----------------------- Page 148-----------------------

136                                                                                        J. Ali et al. 

Table 6   Ideal locations for two-line hybrid seed production and TGMS self-seed multiplication  
(modified from Ali et al. 2018) 

 Seed production operation                Ideal places 
 Hybrid seed production                   India: Aduthurai, Trichy, Killikulum, Madurai, Karnal,  
                                          Delhi Philippines: Los Banos 
 TGMS seed production                     India: Aduthurai, Gudalur, Samalkota, Karnal;  
                                          Philippines: Lucban, Benguet, Nueva Vizcaya 
 Hybrid seed production & TGMS            India: Aduthurai and Samalkota 
 seed multiplication 

9      Wide-Scale Adoption and Use of Two-Line Hybrid Rice  
      Technology 

To achieve wide-scale adoption of two-line hybrid rice technology, we need ideal  
TGMS lines that should possess a higher combining ability, outcrossing rate, and  
market-desirable  grain  quality  features  along  with  insect  and  disease  resistance  
(Fig. 6). During the sterile induction phase, the plants must be 100% male sterile  
with more than 99.5% pollen sterility and must behave stably under well-defined  
fertility-sterility alteration conditions. Higher seed setting above 45% in the self- 
seed multiplication phase is essential. Ideal TGMS lines should have lower CSTP  
(24 °C) and lower CFTP (22 °C). However, researchers are still attempting to lower  
the CSTP to 23 °C (mean temperature), which will render the TGMS lines highly  
stable, especially during the sterile phase, and make them highly suitable for hybrid  
rice seed production. The frequency of heterotic hybrids is much higher for two-line  
hybrids than for three-line hybrids as any nonTGMS parent could be used as a pol- 
len parent, thereby increasing hybrid breeding efficiency. Furthermore, as there is  
no need for restorer genes in the male parents of two-line hybrids, this is highly  
ideal for developing indica/japonica hybrids as most japonica  lines do not possess  
restorer genes. Since there is no need for a maintainer line for seed multiplication,  
this  makes  seed  production  much  simpler  and  highly  cost-effective.  Two-line  
hybrids have obvious superiority over three-line hybrids for rice grain yield, quality,  
and insect pest and disease resistance (Chen et al. 2010). In this regard, the best two- 
line  hybrids  should  address  market  segment  requirements  with  a  30–35%  yield  
advantage  over  market  check  inbreds  and  with  higher  seed  reproducibility  rates  
(>3 t/ha). 
    Two-line hybrid rice technology is feasible for tropical conditions for which the  
temperature regimes are highly suitable for its exploitation. TGMS parental lines  
with lower CSTP of 23 °C are highly essential for the success of this technology. At  
IRRI, we are trying to reach 22 °C for CSTP, which is even more stable and would  
ensure the wide-scale adoption of two-line hybrid rice technology. In this regard,  
the Two-Line Hybrid Rice Study Group involving key hybrid rice seed companies  
agreed to join hands in 2019 primarily to test-verify and validate potential TGMS  
lines, pollen parents, and F  hybrids in the target geographies. The study group will 1 
be able to jointly confirm the strength of two-line hybrid rice technology, especially  

----------------------- Page 149-----------------------

Advances in Two-Line Heterosis Breeding in Rice via the Temperature-Sensitive...            137 

Fig. 8   Suitability maps for hybrid rice seed production and self-seed multiplication of TGMS  
lines for the Philippines developed by the IRRI GIS team 

for its feasibility in South Asia. IRRI will continue to invest in this crucial technol- 
ogy for bringing the benefits of two-line rice hybrids to the rice farmers in South  
Asia. The accomplishment of this study group would ensure a lower cost of hybrid  
seeds, higher heterosis of two-line hybrids, and potential combinations meeting the  
market needs of the target regions. The success of two-line hybrid rice technology  
in tropical Asia would shift the attention of hybrid rice development in China toward  
South Asia, thus triggering widespread adoption of two-line rice hybrids. 

10      Future Directions and Conclusions 

The recent discovery of genome editing tools has opened up more opportunities to  
correct the genes of interest, including the tms gene, and to make them more stable  
and with precise expression. However, in many countries, genome editing is still  
under the genetically modified (GM) domain, including the Philippines. Li et al.  
(2019)  introduced  specific  mutations  into  the  TMS5,  Pi21,  and  Xa13  genes  in  
Pinzhan intermediate breeding material using the CRISPR/Cas9 multiplex genome  
editing system. They demonstrated multiplex gene editing by finding transgene-free  

----------------------- Page 150-----------------------

138                                                                                        J. Ali et al. 

homozygous triple tms5/pi21/xa13 mutants obtained in the T  generation that dis-1 
played characteristics of TGMS with improved resistance to rice blast and bacterial  
leaf blight. However, recent publications on editing the TMS5 gene and also achiev- 
ing multiplex gene editing have increased our confidence to improve TGMS lines  
(Barman et al. 2019; Li et al. 2019; Zhou et al. 2016). 
    Wang and Deng (2018) described the development and implementation of the  
“third-generation”  hybrid  rice  breeding  system  that  is  based  on  a  transgenic  
approach to propagate and use stable recessive nuclear male-sterile lines. Using this  
approach, the male-sterile lines and hybrid rice produced using such a system are  
nontransgenic and hold great promise to boost the production of hybrid rice and  
other crops (Wang and Deng 2018). 
    To conclude, two-line hybrid rice technology primarily concentrates on the iden- 
tification of proper TGMS parental lines with a lower CSTP (23 °C) and matching  
market segment requirements. The hybrids developed out of these TGMS parental  
lines should also meet market needs by achieving consumer and farmer acceptance  
that includes duration, grain shape, grain quality, and insect pest and disease resis- 
tance. Furthermore, these top-performing hybrids should have a high hybrid rice  
seed reproducibility of >3 t/ha to allow the private sector to adopt them. Also, hybrid  
rice seed costs would become relatively cheaper and enable farmers to invest in the  
purchase of seeds. Two-line rice hybrids have several advantages over three-line  
rice hybrids, and they could be easily upscaled once they match market needs. The  
Two-line Study Group was formed in 2019 at IRRI to understand the fundamental  
challenges for the wide-scale adoption of two-line hybrid rice technology and vali- 
date the research efforts by IRRI to meet these challenges and make the technology  
feasible. The study group is in the process of testing and verifying IRRI TGMS  
materials in the target regions. Recent advances in the field of GIS and the precise  
identification of suitable locations for hybrid rice seed production and TGMS self- 
seed  multiplication,  especially  in  the  tropical  countries  in Asia  and Africa,  have  
given us the confidence to scale up two-line hybrid rice technology. 

References 

Abeysekera SW, Abeysiriwardana DS, Dehideniyz E (2003) Characteristics associated with out- 
    crossing rate of cytoplasmic male sterile (CMS) lines in rice under local conditions. Ann Sri  
    Lanka Dept Agric 5:1–6 
Ali J (1993) Studies on temperature sensitive genic male sterility and chemical induced steril- 
    ity  towards  development  of  two  line  hybrids  in  rice  (Oryza  sativa  L.).  Dissertation,  Indian  
    Agricultural Research Institute, New Delhi, India 
Ali J, Siddiq E (1999) Isolation and characterization of a reverse temperature sensitive genic male  
    sterile mutant in rice. Indian J Genet 59(4):423–428 
Ali J, Siddiq E, Zaman FU, Abraham MJ, Ahmed IM (1995) Identification and characterization  
    of temperature sensitive genic male sterile sources in rice (Oryza sativa L.). Indian J Genet  
    55(3):243–259 
Ali J, Dela Paz M, Marfori CM, Nicolas KL (2018) Environment sensitive genic male sterility  
    (EGMS) based hybrid breeding in rice. In: Rao PV, Muralidharan K, Siddiq EA (eds) Modern  

----------------------- Page 151-----------------------

Advances in Two-Line Heterosis Breeding in Rice via the Temperature-Sensitive...                        139 

    breeding strategies for crop improvement. Proceedings of one-day dialogue on 10 July 2017,  
    Professor  Jayashankar  Telangana  State  Agricultural  University  (PJTSAU),  Rajendranagar,  
    Hyderabad, India, p 250 
Allahgholipour MA, Ali AJ, Alinia F, Nagamine T, Kojima Y (2006) Relationship between rice  
    grain  amylose  and  pasting  properties  for  breeding  better  quality  rice  varieties.  Plant  Breed  
    125(4):357–362 
Arasakesary  SJ,  Manonmani  S,  Pushpam  R,  Robin  S  (2015)  New  temperature  sensitive  genic  
    male sterile lines with better out-crossing ability for production of two line hybrid rice. Rice  
    Sci 22(1):49–52 
Athwal DS, Virmani SS (1972) Cytoplasmic male sterility and hybrid breeding in rice. In: Rice  
    breeding. International Rice Research Institute, Los Baños, pp 615–620 
Barman HN, Sheng Z, Fiaz S, Zhong M, Wu Y, Cai Y, Wang W, Jiao G, Tang S, Wei X, Hu P (2019)  
    Generation of a new thermo-sensitive genic male sterile rice line by targeted mutagenesis of  
    TMS5 gene through CRISPR/Cas9 system. BMC Plant Biol 19(1):109. https://doi.org/10.1186/ 
    s12870-019-1715-0 
Cao L, Zhao X (2014) Chinese experiences in breeding three-line, two-line and super hybrid rice.  
    In: Yan W (ed) Rice: germplasm, genetics and improvement. https://doi.org/10.5772/56821 
Carnahan HL, Erikson JR, Tseng ST, Rutger JN (1972) Outlook for hybrid rice in the USA. In:  
    Rice breeding. International Rice Research Institute, Los Baños, pp 603–607 
Chandirakala R, Kandasamy G, Thiyagarajan K (2008) Determination of fertility behaviour of  
    thermo sensitive genic male sterile lines in rice. Oryza 45(2):110–114 
Chandirakala R, Kandasamy G, Thiyagarajan K (2012) Genetic variability and combining ability  
    for quality characters in two line hybrids in rice. Electron J Plant Breed 3(3):843–847 
Chen LY, Xiao YH, Lei DY (2010) Mechanism of sterility and breeding strategies for photope- 
    riod/thermo-sensitive genic male sterile rice. Rice Sci 17(3):161–167. https://doi.org/10.1016/ 
    S1672-6308(09)60012-3 
Chen J, Xu Y, Fei K, Wang R, He J, Fu L, Shao S, Li K, Zhu K, Zhang W, Wang Z, Yang J (2020)  
    Physiological mechanism underlying the effect of high temperature during anthesis on spike- 
    let-opening of photo-thermo-sensitive genic male sterile rice lines. Sci Rep 10(2210):24–27.  
    https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-020-59183-0 
Cheng S, Sun Z, Si H, Zhuo L (1995) Response to photoperiod and temperature in photo-thermo  
    period sensitive genic male sterile line Xinguang S (Oryza sativa L. subsp. indica). Chin J Rice  
    Sci 9(2):87–91 
Collard  BCY,  Beredo  JC,  Lenaerts  B,  Mendoza  R,  Santelices  R,  Lopena  V,  Verdeprado  H,  
    Raghavan C, Gregorio GB, Via L, Demon M, Biswas PS, Iftekharuddaula KM, Rahman MA,  
    Cobb JN, Islam MR (2017) Revisiting rice breeding methods: evaluating the use of rapid gen- 
    eration advance (RGA) for routine rice breeding. Plant Prod Sci 20(4):337–352. https://doi.org 
    /10.1080/1343943X.2017.1391705 
Ding JH, Lu Q, Yidan OY, Mao HL, Zhang PB, Yao JL, Xu CG, Li XH, Xiao JH, Zhang QF (2012)  
    A long noncoding RNA regulates photoperiod-sensitive male sterility, an essential component  
    of hybrid rice. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 109:2654–2659 
Dong NV, Subudhi PK, Luong PN, Quang VD, Quy TD, Zheng HG, Nguyen HT (2000) Molecular  
    mapping of a rice gene conditioning thermosensitive genic male sterility using AFLP, RFLP  
    and SSR techniques. Theor Appl Genet 100(5):727–734 
FAO (Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations) (2020) FAOSTAT database. FAO,  
    Rome. www.fao.org/faostat/en/#data. Accessed 13 Jul 2020 
Gao YZ (1991) Discovery and preliminary study of short photoperiod sensitive male-sterile rice. J  
    Yichun Univ (Nat Sci) 1:1–5 
Hien V, Yoshimura A (2015) Identifying map location and markers linked to thermosensitive genic  
    male sterility gene in 103S line. J Sci Dev 13(3):331–336 
Huang QC, Zhang XT (1991) CIS 28-10s, a new indica photoperiod sensitive genic male sterile  
    rice. Int Rice Res Newsl 16(2):8–9 

----------------------- Page 152-----------------------

140                                                                                                 J. Ali et al. 

Huang TY, Wang Z, Hu YG, Shi SP, Peng T, Chu XD, Liu DY (2008) Genetic analysis and primary  
    mapping of pms 4, a photoperiod-sensitive genic male sterility gene in rice (Oryza sativa). Rice  
    Sci 15(2):153–156 
Hussain A, Ali J, Siddiq E, Gupta V, Reddy U, Ranjekar P (2012) Mapping of tms8 gene for tem- 
    perature-sensitive genic male sterility (TGMS) in rice (Oryza sativa L.). Plant Breed 131:42–47 
Jia J, Li C, Qu X, Wang Q, Deng Q, Weng M, Wang B (2000) Construction of genetic linkage  
    map and mapping of thermo-sensitive genic male sterile gene tms5 in rice. http://icgr.caas.net. 
    cn/973/abstract/bwang.htm 
Jia JH, Zhang DS, Li CY, Qu XP, Wang SW, Chamarerk V, Wang B (2001) Molecular mapping  
    of  the  reverse  thermo-sensitive  genic  male-sterile  gene  (rtms1)  in  rice.  Theor Appl  Genet  
    103(4):607–612 
Jiang YM, Rong Y, Tao GX, Tang LJ (1997) Breeding of DiannongS2, a thermosensitive genic  
    male sterile line with new cytoplasm from japonica  rice. Southwest Chin J Agric Sci 3:21–24 
Jiang J, Mou T, Yu H, Zhou F (2015) Molecular breeding of thermo-sensitive genic male sterile  
    (TGMS) lines of rice for blast resistance using Pi2 gene. Rice 8(1):11. https://doi.org/10.1186/ 
    s12284-015-0048-3 
Joseph CA, Chen Z, Ma D, Zeng HL (2011) Analysis of short photoperiod-sensitive genic male  
    sterility and molecular mapping of rpms3(t) gene in rice (Oryza sativa L.) using SSR markers.  
    Genes Genomics 33:513–519. https://doi.org/10.1007/s13258-010-0074-x 
Kadirimangalam SR, Kumar M, Saraswathi R, Mannonmani S, Raveendran M (2017) Study on  
    critical  sages  and  critical  sterility  point  of  thermo-sensitive  genic  male  sterile  lines  of  rice  
    for  two  line  hybrid  production.  Int  J  Curr  Microbiol Appl  Sci  6(5):2128–2135.  https://doi. 
    org/10.20546/ijcmas.2017.605.238 
Kadirimangalam SR, Hifzur R, Saraswathi R, Kumar M, Raveendran M, Robin S (2019) Fine  
    mapping  and  expression  analysis  of  thermosensitive  genic  male  sterility  gene  (tms)  in  rice  
    (Oryza sativa L.). Plant Gene 19:100186. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.plgene.2019.100186 
Khlaimongkhon S, Chakhonkaen S, Pitngam K, Ditthab K, Sangarwut N, Panyawut N, Wasinanon  
    T, Mongkolsiriwatana C, Chunwongse J, Muangprom A (2019) Molecular markers and candi- 
    date genes for thermo-sensitive genic male sterile in rice. Rice Sci 26(3):147–156. https://doi. 
    org/10.1016/j.rsci.2018.08.006 
Kim YJ, Zhang D (2017) Molecular control of male fertility for crop hybrid breeding. Trends Plant  
    Sci 23(1):53–65 
Lang NT, Subudhi PK, Virmani SS, Brar DS, Khush GS, Li Z, Huang N (1999) Development  
    of PCR-based markers for thermosensitive genetic male sterility gene tms3 (t) in rice (Oryza  
    sativa L.). Hereditas 131(2):121–127 
Latha R, Thiyagarajan K (2010) Fertility alteration behaviour of thermosensitive genic male sterile  
    lines in rice Oryza sativa L. Electron J Plant Breed 1(July):1118–1125 
Latha R, Senthilvel S, Thiyagarajan K (2005) Critical temperature and stages of fertility alteration  
    in thermo-sensitive genic male sterile lines of rice. In: Poster papers of the 4th international  
    crop science congress, Brisbane, 2004 
Lee  DS,  Chen  LJ,  Suh  HS  (2005)  Genetic  characterization  and  fine  mapping  of  a  novel  
    thermo-sensitive  genic  male-sterile  gene  tms6  in  rice  (Oryza  sativa  L.).  Theor Appl  Genet  
    111(7):1271–1277 
Li CQ (2009) Accelerating the development of japonica  hybrid rice in China. In: Xie F, Hardy  
    B (eds) Accelerating hybrid rice development. International Rice Research Institute, Laguna,  
    pp 267–289 
Li RB, Pandey MP, Sharma P (2005) Inheritance of thermosensitive genic male sterility in rice  
    (Oryza sativa L.). Curr Sci 88(11):1805–1815 
Li SF, Shen L, Hu P, Liu Q, Zhu XD, Qian Q, Wang KJ, Wang YX (2019) Developing disease- 
    resistant  thermosensitive  male  sterile  rice  by  multiplex  gene  editing.  J  Integr  Plant  Biol  
    61(12):1201–1205. https://doi.org/10.1111/jipb.12774 

----------------------- Page 153-----------------------

Advances in Two-Line Heterosis Breeding in Rice via the Temperature-Sensitive...                         141 

Li C, Tao RF, Li Y, Duan MH, Xu JH (2020) Transcriptome analysis of the thermosensitive genic  
    male-sterile line provides new insights into fertility alteration in rice (Oryza sativa). Genomics  
    112(3):2119–2129. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ygeno.2019.12.006 
Liu N, Shan Y, Wang FP, Xu CG, Peng KM, Li XH, Zhang QF (2001) Identification of an 85-kb  
    DNA fragment containing pms 1 a locus for photoperiod-sensitive genic male sterility in rice.  
    Mol Gen Genomics 266:271–275 
Liu X, Li X, Zhang X, Wang S (2010) Genetic analysis and mapping of a thermosensitive genic  
    male sterility gene, tms6(t), in rice (Oryza sativa L.). Genome 53(2):119–124 
Lopez  MT,  Tojinda  T,  Vanavichit  A,  Tragoonrung  S  (2000)  Introgression  of  thermosensitive  
    male sterility gene to aromatic Thai rice. In: Posters of the 4th International Rice Genetics  
    Symposium, International Rice Research Institute, Laguna, Philippines, 22–27 October 2000 
Lopez MT, Toojinda T, Vanavichit A, Tragoonrung S (2003) Microsatellite markers flanking the  
    gene facilitated tropical TGMS rice line development. Crop Sci 43(6):2267–2271 
Lu X, Wang J (1988) Fertility transformation and genetic behavior of Hubei photoperiod-sensi- 
    tive genic male sterile rice. In: Hybrid rice. International Rice Research Institute, Los Baños,  
    pp 129–138 
Lu XG, Zhang ZG, Maruyama K, Virmani SS (1994) Current status of two-line method of hybrid  
    rice breeding. In: Virmani SS (ed) Hybrid rice technology: new developments and future pros- 
    pects. International Rice Research Institute, Manila, pp 37–49 
Lu Q, Li XH, Guo D, Xu CG, Zhang Q (2005) Localization of pms 3, a gene for photoperiod- 
    sensitive genic male sterility, to a 28.4-kb DNA fragment. Mol Gen Genomics 273(6):507–511 
Luo Y, Tingchen M, Teo J, Luo Z, Li Z, Yang J, Yin Z (2020) Marker-assisted breeding of thermo- 
    sensitive genic male sterile line 1892S for disease resistance and submergence tolerance. Rice  
    Sci 27:89–98 
Mahalingam A, Saraswathi R, Ramalingam J, Jayaraj T (2013) Genetics of floral traits in cyto- 
    plasmic  male  sterile  (CMS)  and  restorer  lines  of  hybrid  rice  (Oryza  sativa  L.).  Pak  J  Bot  
    45(6):1897–1904 
Manonmani S, Pushpam R, Robin S (2016) Stability of TGMS lines under different temperature  
    regimes for pollen sterility. J Rice Res 9(1):17–19 
Maruyama K, Araki H, Amano E (1990) Enhancement of out-crossing habits of rice plant by muta- 
    tion breeding. Gamma Field Symp 29:11–25 
Maruyama K, Araki H, Kato H (1991) Thermosensitive genetic male sterility induced by irradia- 
    tion. In: Rice genetics II. International Rice Research Institute, Manila, pp 227–235 
Mei MH, Dai XK, Xu CG, Zhang QF (1999) Mapping and genetic analysis of genes for photo- 
    period-sensitive genic male sterility in rice using the original mutant Nongken 58S. Crop Sci  
    39:1711–1715 
Mishra A,  Bohra A  (2018)  Non-coding  RNAs  and  plant  male  sterility:  current  knowledge  and  
    future prospects. Plant Cell Rep:1–15 
Mou TM, Xing-Gui L, Hoan NT, Virmani SS (2003) Two-line hybrid rice breeding in and outside  
    China. In: Virmani SS, Mao CX, Hardy B (eds) Hybrid rice for food security, poverty allevia- 
    tion, and environmental protection. Proceedings of the 4th international symposium on hybrid  
    rice, Hanoi, 14–17 May 2002. International Rice Research Institute, Manila, pp 31–52 
Nas TMS, Sanchez DL, Diaz MGQ, Mendioro MS, Virmani SS (2005) Pyramiding of thermosen- 
    sitive genetic male sterility (TGMS) genes and identification of a candidate tms5 gene in rice.  
    Euphytica 145:67–75 
Oard JH, Hu J (1995) Inheritance and characterization of pollen fertility in photoperiodically sen- 
    sitive rice mutants. Euphytica 82:17–23 
Oka HT, Morishima H (1967) The ancestors of cultivated rice and their evolution. Department of  
    Applied Genetics, National Institute of Genetics, Japan. p 145 
Pan Y, Li Q, Wang Z, Wang Y, Ma R, Zhu L, He G, Chen R (2014) Genes associated with ther- 
    mosensitive genic male sterility in rice identified by comparative expression profiling. BMC  
    Genomics 15(1):1114. https://doi.org/10.1186/1471-2164-15-1114 

----------------------- Page 154-----------------------

142                                                                                             J. Ali et al. 

Pang Y, Ali  J, Wang  X,  Franje  NJ,  Revilleza  JE,  Xu  J,  Li  Z  (2016)  Relationship  of  rice  grain  
    amylose,  gelatinization  temperature  and  pasting  properties  for  breeding  better  eating  and  
    cooking quality of rice varieties. PLoS One 11(12):e0168483. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal. 
    pone.0168483 
Peng HF, Zhang ZF, Wu B, Chen XH, Zhang GQ, Zhang ZM, Lu YP (2008) Molecular mapping of  
    two reverse photoperiod-sensitive genic male sterility genes (rpms1 and rpms2) in rice (Oryza  
    sativa L.). Theor Appl Genet 118(1):77–83 
Peng HF, Chen XH, Lu YP, Peng YF, Wan BH, Chen ND, Wu B, Xin SP, Zhang GQ (2010) Fine  
    mapping of a gene for non-pollen type thermosensitive genic male sterility in rice (Oryza sativa  
    L.). Theor Appl Genet 120:1013–1020 
Pitnjam  K,  Chakhonkaen  S,  Toojinda  T,  Muangprom A  (2008)  Identification  of  a  deletion  in  
    tms2 and development of gene-based markers for selection. Planta 228:813–822. https://doi. 
    org/10.1007/s00425-008-0784-3 
Qi Y, Liu Q, Zhang L, Mao B, Yan D, Jin Q, He Z (2014) Fine mapping and candidate gene analy- 
    sis of the novel thermo-sensitive genic male sterility tms9-1 gene in rice. Theor Appl Genet  
    127(5):1173–1182 
Rahul Roy R, Kumaresan D (2019) Genetic variability and association studies for yield and floral  
    traits in temperature sensitive male sterile lines (TGMS) of rice (Oryza sativa L). Electron J  
    Plant Breed 10(3):1200–1209. https://doi.org/10.5958/0975-928X.2019.00152.2 
Rajesh T, Radhakrishnan VV, Pressana KK, Francies RM, Sreenivasan E, Ibrahim KK, Latha A  
    (2017) Critical stages of thermo-sensitive genic male sterile lines of rice in Kerala. ORYZA Int  
    J Rice 54(4):401–406. https://doi.org/10.5958/2249-5266.2017.00054.6 
Ramakrishna  S,  Mallikarjuna  SBP,  Mishra  B,  Virakthamath  BC,  Illyas  Ahmed  M  (2006)  
    Characterization of thermo sensitive genetic male sterile lines for temperature sensitivity, mor- 
    phology and floral biology in rice (Oryza sativa L.). Asian J Plant Sci 5(3):421–428. https:// 
    doi.org/10.3923/ajps.2006.421.428 
Reddy OUK, Siddiq EA, Sarma NP, Ali J, Hussain AJ, Nimmakayala P, Reddy AS (2000) Genetic  
    analysis of temperature-sensitive male sterility in rice. Theor Appl Genet 100(5):794–801 
Rutger JN, Schaeffer GW (1989) An environmentally sensitive genetic male sterile mutant in rice.  
    In: Annual  meeting  of  the American  Society  of Agronomy,  Las Vegas,  Nev.,  USA.  Agron.  
    Abstr. p 98 
Salgotra RK, Gupta BB, Ahmed MI (2012) Characterization of thermo-sensitive genic male sterility  
    (TGMS) rice genotypes: (Oryza sativa L.) at different altitudes. Aust J Crop Sci 6(6):957–962 
Sanchez DL, Virmani SS (2005) Identification of thermosensitive genic male-sterile lines with low  
    critical sterility point for hybrid rice breeding. Philipp J Crop Sci 30:19–28 
Sasikala R, Kalaiyarasi R, Paramathama M (2015) Influence of weather factors on fertility alter- 
    ation in thermosensitive genic male sterile lines of rice (Oryza sativa L.). Int J Trop Agric  
    33(2):773–779. https://doi.org/10.13140/RG.2.2.24654.41280 
Shen Y, Gao M, Cai Q (1994) A novel environment induced genic male sterile (EGMS) mutant in  
    indica rice. Euphytica 76:89–96 
Sheng Z, Wei X, Shao G, Chen M, Song J, Tang S, Chen L (2013) Genetic analysis and fine map- 
    ping of tms9, a novel thermosensitive genic male-sterile gene in rice (Oryza sativa L.). Plant  
    Breed 132(2):159–164 
Sheng Z, Tang L, Shao G, Xie L, Jiao G, Tang S, Hu P (2015) The rice thermo-sensitive genic male  
    sterility gene tms9: pollen abortion and gene isolation. Euphytica 203(1):145–152 
Shi MS (1981) Report on breeding and application of two-line system in later japonica . Hubei  
    Agric Sci 7:1–3 
Shi MS (1985) The discovery and study of the photosensitive recessive male sterile rice (Oryza  
    sativa L. subsp. japonica ). Sci Agric Sin 2:44–48 
Shi MS, Deng JY (1986) The discovery, determination and utilization of Hubei photosensitive  
    genic male sterile rice (Oryza sativa L. subsp. japonica ). Acta Genet Sin 13(2):107–112 

----------------------- Page 155-----------------------

Advances in Two-Line Heterosis Breeding in Rice via the Temperature-Sensitive...                        143 

Shukla SK, Pandey MP (2008) Combining ability and heterosis over environments for yield and  
    yield components in two-line hybrids involving thermosensitive genic male sterile lines in rice  
    (Oryza sativa L.). Plant Breed 127(1):28–32. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1439-0523.2007.01432.x 
Si HM, Fu YP, Liu WZ, Sun ZX, Hu GC (2012) Pedigree analysis of photoperiod thermo-sensitive  
    genic male sterile rice. Acta Agron Sin 38:394–407 
Siddiq  EA, Ali  J  (1999)  Innovative  male  sterility  systems  for  exploitation  of  hybrid  vigour  in  
    crop plants: environment sensitive genic male sterility system. Proc Indian Natl Sci Acad B  
    65:331–350 
Song FS, Ni JL, Qian YL, Li L, Ni DH, Yang JB (2016) Development of SNP-based dCAPS mark- 
    ers for identifying male sterile gene tms5 in two-line hybrid rice. Genet Mol Res 15(3). https:// 
    doi.org/10.4238/gmr.15038512 
Soundararaj AK, Ali AJ, Thiyagarajan P, Arumugachamy S (2002) Prospects of two-line hybrid  
    rice breeding in Tamil Nadu, India. Int Rice Res Notes 27(1):1 
Subudhi PK, Borkakati RP, Virmani SS, Huang N (1997) Identification of RAPD markers linked to  
    rice thermosensitive genetic male sterility gene by bulk segregant analysis. Rice Genet Newsl  
    12:228–231 
Swaminathan MS, Siddiq EA, Sharma SD (1972) Outlook for hybrid rice in India. Rice breeding.  
    International Rice Research Institute, Laguna, pp 609–613 
Tan ZC, Li YY, Chen LB, Zhou GQ (1990) Studies on ecological-adaptability of dual purpose line  
    Annong S-1. Hybrid Rice 3:35–38 
Vinodhini M, Saraswathi R, Viswanathan PL, Raveendran M (2019) Studies on sterility behaviour  
    in thermo-sensitive genic male sterile lines of rice. Int J Chem Stud 7(6):55–61 
Viraktamath BC, Virmani SS (2001) Expression of thermosensitive genic male sterility in rice  
    under   varying   temperature   situations.   Euphytica   122(1):137–143.   https://doi.org/10.102 
    3/A:1012607608792 
Virmani SS (1992) Transfer and induction of thermosensitive genic male sterile mutant in indica  
    rice. In: Proceedings of the second international symposium on hybrid rice, 21–25 April 1992.  
    International Rice Research Institute, Manila 
Virmani SS (1994) Heterosis and hybrid rice breeding. Monographs on theoretical and applied  
    genetics. Springer, Berlin, 192 p 
Virmani SS, Voc PC (1991) Induction of photo- and thermo-sensitive male sterility in indica rice.  
    Agron Abstr 119 
Virmani SS, Sun ZX, Mou TM, Ali J, Mao CX (2003) Two-line hybrid rice breeding manual.  
    International Rice Research Institute, Los Banos, p 88 
Wang H, Deng XW (2018) Development of the “third-generation” hybrid rice in China. Genomics  
    Proteomics Bioinformatics 16(6):393–396. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.gpb.2018.12.001 
Wang B, Xu WW, Wang JZ et al (1995) Tagging and mapping the thermo-sensitive genic male- 
    sterile gene in rice (Oryza sativa L.) with molecular markers. Theor Appl Genet 91:1111–1114.  
    https://doi.org/10.1007/BF00223928 
Wang YG, Xing QH, Deng QY, Liang FS, Yuan LP, Weng ML, Wang B (2003) Fine mapping of the  
    rice thermo-sensitive genic male-sterile gene tms5. Theor Appl Genet 107(5):917–921 
Wang C, Zhang P, Ma Z, Zhang M, Sun G, Ling D (2004) Development of a genetic marker linked  
    to a new thermo-sensitive male sterile gene in rice (Oryza sativa L.). Euphytica 140(3):217–222 
Wang K, Peng X, Ji Y, Yang P, Zhu Y, Li S (2013) Gene, protein, and network of male sterility in  
    rice. Front Plant Sci 4:92. https://doi.org/10.3389/fpls.2013.00092 
Wang SY, Tian QY, Zhou SQ, Mao DD, Chen LB (2019) A quantitative proteomic analysis of the  
    molecular mechanism underlying fertility conversion in thermo-sensitive genetic male sterility  
    line AnnongS-1. BMC Plant Biol 19:65. https://doi.org/10.1186/s12870-019-1666-5 
Wongpatsa U, Kaveeta L, Sriwongchai T, Khamsuk O (2014) Effects of temperature on male ste- 
    rility of two inbred lines of hybrid rice. Kasetsart J Nat Sci 48(4):525–533 
Worldometer (2020). https://www.worldometers.info/world-population/#/table-forecast. Accessed  
    13 Jul 2020 

----------------------- Page 156-----------------------

144                                                                                           J. Ali et al. 

Xu J, Wang B, Wu Y, Du P, Wang J, Wang M, Liang G (2011) Fine mapping and candidate gene  
    analysis of ptgms 2-1, the photoperiod-thermo-sensitive genic male sterile gene in rice (Oryza  
    sativa L.). Theor Appl Genet 122(2):365–372 
Yamaguchi Y,  Hirasawa  H,  Minami  M,  Ujihara A  (1997)  Linkage  analysis  of  thermosensitive  
    genic male sterility gene, tms-2 in rice (Oryza sativa L.). Jpn J Breed 47(4):371–373 
Yang QH, Zhu J (1996) Breeding of go543S, an indica PTGMS rice with its sterility induced by  
    short day-length and low temperature. Hybrid Rice 1:9–10 
Yang RC, Wang NY, Mang K, Chau Q, Yang RR, Chen S (1990) Preliminary studies on applica- 
    tion of indica photo-thermo genic male sterile line 5460S in hybrid rice breeding. Hybrid Rice  
    1:32–34 
Yang YZ, Tang PL, Yang WC, Liu AM, Chen YQ, Ling WB, Shi TB (2000) Breeding and utiliza- 
    tion of TGMS line Zhu1S in rice. Hybrid Rice 15(2):6–9 
Yang ZY, Zhang GL, Zhang CH, Chen JJ, Wang HQ, Zhang JJ, Yan Z (2002) Breeding of fine qual- 
    ity PTGMS line Guangzhan 63S in medium indica rice. Hybrid Rice 17(4):4–6 
Yang QK, Liang CY, Zhuang W, Jun Li J, Deng HB, Deng QY, Wang B (2007) Characterization  
    and identification of the candidate gene of rice thermo-sensitive genic male sterile gene tms5  
    by mapping. Planta 225:321–330 
Yao L, Zhang Y, Liu C, Liu Y, Wang Y, Liang D, Liu J, Sahoo G, Kelliher T (2018) OsMATL  
    mutation  induces  haploid  seed  formation  in  indica  rice.  Nat  Plants  4:530–533.  https://doi. 
    org/10.1038/s41477-018-0193-y 
Yiming J (1988) Studies on the effect of high temperature on fertility of the male sterile lines in  
    Dian-type hybrid rice [J]. J Yunnan Agric Univ 2000 
Yu J, Han J, Kim YJ, Song M, Yang Z, He Y, Fu R, Luo Z, Hu J, Liang W, Zhang D (2017) Two  
    rice receptor-like kinases maintain male fertility under changing temperatures. Proc Natl Acad  
    Sci U S A 114(46):12327–12332. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1705189114 
Yuan LP (1987) Strategic assumption of hybrid rice breeding. Hybrid Rice 1:1–3 
Yuan LP (2014) Development of hybrid rice to ensure food security. Rice Sci 21(1):1–2. https:// 
    doi.org/10.1016/S1672-6308(13)60167-5 
Zhang Z, Zeng H, Yang J, Yuan S, Zhang D (1994) Conditions inducing fertility alteration and eco- 
    logical adaptation of photoperiod-sensitive genic male-sterile rice. Field Crops Res 38(2):111– 
    120. https://doi.org/10.1016/0378-4290(94)90005-1 
Zhang H, Xu CX, He Y, Zong J, Yang X, Si HM, Sun ZX, Hu JP, Liang WQ, Zhang DB (2013)  
    Mutation in CSA creates a new photoperiod-sensitive genic male sterile line applicable for  
    hybrid rice seed production. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 110:76–81 
Zhou YF, Zhang XY, Xue QZ (2011) Fine mapping and candidate gene prediction of the photo- 
    period and thermo-sensitive genic male sterile gene pms 1(t) in rice. J Zhejiang Univ Sci B  
    12(6):436–447 
Zhou H, Liu Q, Li J, Jiang D, Zhou L, Wu P, Chen L (2012) Photoperiod-and thermo-sensitive  
    genic male sterility in rice are caused by a point mutation in a novel noncoding RNA that pro- 
    duces a small RNA. Cell Res 22(4):649–660 
Zhou H, Zhou M, Yang Y et al (2014) RNase ZS1 processes UbL40 mRNAs and controls ther- 
    mosensitive  genic  male  sterility  in  rice.  Nat  Commun  5:4884.  https://doi.org/10.1038/ 
    ncomms5884 
Zhou H, He M, Li J, Chen L, Huang Z, Zheng S, Zhu L, Ni E, Jiang D, Zhao B, Zhuang C (2016)  
    Development of commercial thermo-sensitive genic male sterile rice accelerates hybrid rice  
    breeding using the CRISPR/Cas9-mediated TMS5 editing system. Sci Rep 6:37395.  https:// 
    doi.org/10.1038/srep37395 

----------------------- Page 157-----------------------

Advances in Two-Line Heterosis Breeding in Rice via the Temperature-Sensitive...                 145 

Open Access    This chapter is licensed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution 4.0  
International License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/), which permits use, sharing,  
adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give appropriate  
credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons license and  
indicate if changes were made. 
    The images or other third party material in this chapter are included in the chapter’s Creative  
Commons license, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not  
included in the chapter’s Creative Commons license and your intended use is not permitted by  
statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from  
the copyright holder. 

----------------------- Page 158-----------------------

Growing Rice with Less Water: Improving  
Productivity by Decreasing Water Demand 

Balwant Singh, Shefali Mishra, Deepak Singh Bisht, and Rohit Joshi 
                                                                                             

Abstract  Rice is a staple food for more than half of the global population. With the  
increasing population, the yield of rice must correspondingly increase to fulfill the  
requirement.  Rice  is  cultivated  worldwide  in  four  different  types  of  ecosystems,  
which are limited by the availability of irrigation water. However, water-limiting  
conditions  negatively  affect  rice  production;  therefore,  to  enhance  productivity  
under  changing  climatic  conditions,  improved  cultivation  practices  and  drought-  
tolerant   cultivars/varieties   are   required.   There   are   two   basic   approaches   to  
cultivation: (1) plant based and (2) soil and irrigation based, which can be targeted  
for  improving  rice  production.  Crop  plants  primarily  follow  three  mechanisms:  
drought  escape,  avoidance,  and  tolerance.  Based  on  these  mechanisms,  different  
strategies  are  followed,  which  include  cultivar  selection  based  on  yield  stability  
under drought. Similarly, soil- and irrigation-based strategies consist of decreasing  
non-beneficial  water  depletions  and  water  outflows,  aerobic  rice  development,  
alternate wetting and drying, saturated soil culture, system of rice intensification,  
and  sprinkler  irrigation.  Further  strategies  involve  developing  drought-tolerant  
cultivars  through  marker-assisted  selection/pyramiding,  genomic  selection,  QTL  
mapping,  and  other  breeding  and  cultivation  practices  such  as  early  planting  to  
follow escape strategies and decreasing stand density to minimize competition with  
weeds.   Similarly,   the   identification   of   drought-responsive   genes   and   their  
manipulation  will  provide  a  technological  solution  to  overcome  drought  stress.  
However, it was the Green Revolution that increased crop production. To maintain  
the balance, there is a need for another revolution to cope with the increasing demand. 

Keywords  Aerobic rice · Drought · Molecular breeding · Oryza sativa ·  
Transgenic · Water deficit 

B. Singh · S. Mishra · D. S. Bisht  
ICAR-National Institute for Plant Biotechnology, New Delhi, India  

R. Joshi (*)  
Division of Biotechnology, CSIR-Institute of Himalayan Bioresource Technology,   
Palampur, Himachal Pradesh, India  

Academy of Scientific & Innovative Research (AcSIR), Palampur, Himachal Pradesh, India 

© The Author(s) 2021                                                                                147 
J. Ali, S. H. Wani (eds.), Rice Improvement,  
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-66530-2_5 

----------------------- Page 159-----------------------

148                                                                                B. Singh et al. 

1     Introduction 

More than 60% of the human population consumes rice (Joshi et al. 2018). An FAO  
report that considered rice production and growth of the human population in the  
past decade suggested the urgent need to increase rice production by 70% to fulfill  
upcoming  demand  by  2050  (FAO  2018;  Schroeder  et  al.  2013).  In  view  of  this  
increased demand for rice production, an urgent need exists to study rice cultivation  
practices. Basically, rice cultivation is grouped into four ecosystems: irrigated (50%  
of the total rice grown), rainfed lowland (34%), rainfed upland (9%), and flood-  
prone (7%) (IRRI 2014). Cultivation under the irrigated rice ecosystem is the most  
productive and plays a significant role in meeting global food demand. However,  
irrigated  rice  itself  is  strongly  affected  by  water  availability,  irrigation  patterns,  
water quality, and the duration of water standing in the rice field during the growth  
period (Joshi et al. 2018). The rainfed ecosystem has a higher opportunity for yield  
improvement as it covers 43% of rice cultivation that still has limited yield potential.  
The most common factors that limit rice production in the rainfed ecosystem are  
irregular water supplies (i.e., severe drought, flood, and sometimes both in a single  
cropping season) and infertile soil due to its acidic or saline nature. Such conditions  
further complicate rice genetic improvement programs, which increases pressure on  
the irrigated ecosystem (He et al. 2020). 
    In recent years, changes in environmental conditions imposed multiple abiotic  
stresses that severely affect rice production in all ecosystems by strongly inhibiting  
plant growth and development (Joshi et al.  2020). According to one estimate, to  
produce 1 kg of rice, 2000–5000 L of water are required (Joshi et al. 2009; Caine  
et al. 2019). The increased competition of accelerated urbanization and industrial  
development further limit freshwater resources for rice production. Therefore, the  
need for “more rice with less water” is the need of the hour for global food security  
(Maneepitak  et  al.  2019;  He  et  al.  2020).  Thus,  water  availability  is  the  key  
requirement for rice cultivation in each of the rice ecosystems. This forces us to  
develop new techniques of water management for rice cultivation that specifically  
improve production in different ecosystems (Carracelas et al. 2019). Further, water  
use  can  be  managed  either  by  cultivating  water-stress-tolerant  cultivars  that  can  
yield more under less water availability or by managing soil conditions suitable for  
growing  rice  under  water-deficient  conditions.  Stress-tolerant  cultivars  can  be  
identified from crop germplasm resources so that stress tolerance can be transferred  
into high-yielding cultivated varieties (Singh et al. 2015a,b; Mishra et al. 2016a, b).  
Aerobic rice (AR) is one of the promising rice cultivation systems for managing  
water and growing rice under water-limited conditions, thus decreasing water losses  
by 27–51% and increasing water productivity by 32–88% (Nie et al.  2007; Joshi  
et  al.  2009).  Aerobic  rice  varieties  are  usually  grown  in  upland  conditions  in  
unpuddled soil in non-flooded conditions, that is, unsaturated (aerobic) soil with  
less water requirement (Bouman et al. 2006; Joshi and Kumar 2012). Under these  
conditions, the cultivation of high-yielding aerobic rice genotypes may help to save  
water. Other approaches that decrease water consumption are alternate wetting and  

----------------------- Page 160-----------------------

Growing Rice with Less Water: Improving Productivity by Decreasing Water Demand           149 

drying of the field; saturated soil culture (SSC) that relies on forming farming beds,  
separated by furrows in which a shallow depth of water is maintained; mid-season  
drainage;  delayed  flooding;  and  sprinkler  irrigation.  Keeping  this  in  mind,  the  
Indian Council of Agricultural Research-National Rice Research Institute (ICAR-  
NRRI), India, has released promising rice varieties for cultivation in varying rice  
ecosystems (https://crri.icar.gov.in/popular_var.pdf). 
   Water-limiting conditions are usually designated as drought and different plant  
species  respond  in  different  ways  to  cope  with  drought  conditions:  avoidance,  
tolerance,   and   escape    (Turner    2003).   These    adaptation    strategies   include  
physiological and metabolic adjustment by plants to minimize damage caused by  
drought (IPCC 2001; Singh et al. 2015c). Escape is the capability of the plant to not  
reach drought conditions but instead complete the life cycle before drought onset in  
water-sufficient  conditions  (Boyer  1996;  Joshi  et  al.  2014).  This  is  of  crucial  
importance as it is related to early establishment of the crop, inhibition of stomatal  
conductance, and water management. Thus, the goal is to have early flowering and  
maturity along with rapid germination and seedling establishment. Avoidance is a  
means  to  avoid  the  stress  by  maintaining  ample  water  during  the  stress  period  
(Bodner et al. 2015; Urban et al. 2017). Plants achieve this by changing the shape  
and  decreasing  the  number  and  size  of  leaves.  Plants  also  roll  their  leaves  and  
change their orientation to decrease absorption of radiation and prevent water loss  
(Caine et al. 2019). Moreover, an increase in waxiness of leaves, root density, and  
deep rooting enables plants to uptake water from depth for sustaining themselves  
during adverse conditions (Ashraf et al. 2011; Joshi and Karan 2014). Cultivars that  
have these traits are suitable for the rainfed cropping system (Bodner et al.  2015;  
Korres et al. 2016). According to Levitt (1980), drought avoidance via an efficient  
water uptake methodology is the best method to achieve higher yield. Additionally,  
areas that are prone to frequent drought conditions should be cropped with cultivars  
that are early maturing and have high vigor (Gouache et al.  2012). The tolerance  
mechanism actually allows plants to survive and grow in stress conditions. This is  
done by maintaining turgor through osmoregulation, producing antioxidants, and  
accumulating compatible solutes (Joshi and Chinnusamy 2014). 

2     Current Rice Cultivars/Varieties Grown Under  
     Water-Limiting Conditions 

Availability of water for irrigation is increasingly a limiting factor in attaining the  
full-yield potential among many crops (Boyer  1982). Various techniques have been  
devised and discovered to counteract the effects of water-limiting conditions and  
climate  changes  by  using  acquired  plant  adaptations.  The  appropriate  choice  of  
cultivar as per its adaptation to the rice ecosystem/local environment is important as  
different varieties show different mechanisms to cope with drought (Turner 2003).  
A field experiment using two rice genotypes, Hanyou 113 (HY113) and Yangliangyou  

----------------------- Page 161-----------------------

150                                                                                            B. Singh et al. 

6  (YLY6),  under  flooding  and  drought  stress  revealed  that  drought  stress  at  the  
reproductive  stage  strongly  affects  physiological  traits,  yield,  and  grain  quality  
(Yang et al. 2019). IRRI has successfully developed and released 17 high-yielding  
drought-tolerant rice varieties, which include Sahod Ulan and Katihan (Philippines),  
Hardinath   and   Sookha   Dhan   (Nepal),   Sahbhagi   Dhan   (India),   BRRI   dhan  
(Bangladesh), Inpago LIPI Go 1/2 (Indonesia), M’ZIVA (Mozambique), and UPIA3  
(Nigeria) (Kumar et al. 2014). In India, Sahbhagi Dhan was reported to produce 4 t/ 
ha under normal conditions and 1–2 t/ha under severe drought conditions. Because  
of its early maturity (105 days) and low irrigation requirements, farmers can save up  
to USD 60 per crop (Basu et al. 2017). Similarly, in Nepal, drought-tolerant cultivar  
Sookha Dhan 2 showed higher yield from an altitude of 1000–1600 masl (Dhakal  
et al. 2020). Further, ICAR-NRRI has developed and released drought-tolerant rice  
cultivar DRR-Dhan 45, which is moderately resistant to major diseases and pests  
such  as  rice  tungro  viruses,  sheath  rot,  and  blast,  with  average  yield  of  6  t/ha  
(Nirmala et al. 2016). 

3      Existing Rice Cultivation Practices Under  
      Water-Deficit Conditions 

Farmers practice a traditional way of cultivation and selection of cultivars as per  
their natural adaptations toward changes in environmental conditions (Gala Bijl and  
Fisher  2011).  However,  with  rice  cultivation,  emphasis  has  been  given  to  the  
development  of  rice  cultivation  techniques  that  result  in  a  lot  of  technological  
options  for  cultivation  to  enhance  production  under  water-limiting  conditions  
(Fig.  1). A  cumulative  approach  of  water  management  and  cultivation  of  high-  
yielding varieties that performed well under water-limiting conditions was supposed  
to  diminish  the  yield  penalty. Therefore,  water  management  practices,  including  
short-term,  long-term,  and  anticipatory  phenological  adaptation  measures,  are  
required before assessing the impact of water-limiting conditions, and they usually  
aim at mitigating effects (Nguyen 2005; IPCC 2007). A study on phenological and  
water-saving  adaptation  strategies  of  crop  plants  showing  higher  yield  stability  
under  water-limiting  conditions  has  further  proved  the  utility  of  cumulative  
approaches (Bodner et al. 2015). 

3.1      Plant-Based Strategies  

3.1.1      Selection of Cultivars/Varieties 

The right choice of cultivar plays a significant role in rice cultivation under less  
water because of specificity of the tolerance mechanism of a cultivar to drought:  
tolerance,      avoidance,      and     escape.     Cultivar     selection      basically     depends       on  

----------------------- Page 162-----------------------

Growing Rice with Less Water: Improving Productivity by Decreasing Water Demand                   151 

                                                                                  QTL  
                                                                                mapping 

                                                                                Genomic  
                                                                                selection 

                                                                                 Marker- 
                                                                                assisted  
                                                                                selection 

         Reduced                                                            Marker-assisted  
      stand density                                                           backcrossing 

     Date of planting                                                        Marker-assisted  
                                                                               pyramiding 

  Selection of cultivars/                                               Marker-assisted recurrent  
         varieties                  Transgenic approaches                       selection 

        Plant based          Sprinkler    Saturated   Aerobic rice          Molecular breeding  
                             irrigation  soil culture development 

                            Alternate wetting and   System of rice  
                              drying framework      intensification 

                                Reducing non-beneficial water  
                                depletions and water outflows 

                                    Soil and irrigation based 

Fig. 1   Different strategies to improve rice productivity by decreasing water demand 

demography and availability of water for irrigation. Following an escape strategy,  
plants complete their life cycle before drought onset in water-insufficient conditions  
(Boyer  1996). Cultivars having early flowering and maturity date and also rapid  
germination  and  establishment  time  completed  their  life  cycle  early  and  were  
therefore  selected  for  cultivation  in  rainfed  upland,  lowland,  and  typhoon-prone  
coastal areas (Fukai et al. 1999). Areas that are prone to frequent drought conditions  
should  be  cropped  with  cultivars  that  are  early  maturing  and  have  high  vigor  
(Gouache et al. 2012; Bodner et al. 2015). Similarly, cultivars adapted for drought  
avoidance traits such as decreasing size and number of leaves, leaf rolling, and an  
increase in waxiness of leaves, density of root, and deep rooting are suitable for  
cropping in the rainfed ecosystem (Farooq et al. 2009; Bodner et al. 2015; Korres  
et al. 2016). Plants having a tolerance mechanism maintain turgor pressure through  
osmotic adjustment via generating osmolytes and osmoprotectant and producing  
antioxidants. In addition, the development of screening tools to identify drought  
stress tolerance at the seedling stage is crucial for developing rice cultivars suitable  
for water-limited environments. Thus, 100  tropical japonica rice genotypes were  
studied under pot conditions for their drought tolerance and a cumulative drought  
stress response index (CDSRI) was developed by combining individual response  
indices of all the varieties that were found to be important for identifying tolerant  
cultivars  for  early-season  drought  (Lone  et  al.  2019).  Similarly,  taking  15  rice  
cultivars  commonly  grown  in  Mississippi  (USA),  early-season  drought-tolerant  
cultivars were selected by analyzing total drought response index (TDRI) (Singh  
et al. 2017). 

----------------------- Page 163-----------------------

152                                                                                B. Singh et al. 

3.1.2     Date of Planting 

Planting date is related to the drought escape mechanism so as to escape drought  
conditions and it is the most appropriate method of escape (Ding et al. 2020). Thus,  
to avoid drought, optimization of sowing time as per water availability and demand  
is  crucial.  Three  reasons  were  found  to  be  critical  for  early  sowing  in  dry  
environments (Bodner et al. 2015): 

 1.  Climatic variations in evapotranspiration improve water-use efficiency of early-  
    planted cultivars because most of the developmental stages have to face decreased  
    water potential gradients. 
 2.  Early  sowing  shifts  sensitive  stages  (germination  and  reproductive  stages)  to  
    periods of better water availability. 
 3.  Early-sown cultivars develop deeper roots and facilitate the drought avoidance  
    mechanism. 

    For long-term climatic changes, early sowing is a suitable solution (Ding et al.  
2017) because of the availability of ample amounts of water and nutrients that will  
improve  canopy  development,  yield,  and  biomass  production.  In  contrast,  an  
increase in canopy area will increase evapotranspiration (Lin et al. 2020). Therefore,  
variations  in  biomass  production  per  unit  transpiration  through  adjustments  in  
planting dates will be beneficial for drought tolerance or drought escape. Although  
early planting could enhance spikelet sterility caused by high temperatures (Jagadish  
et al. 2015), by using early-maturing cultivars, both a drought and heat stress escape  
strategy will be a beneficial approach (Mukamuhirwa et al. 2019). 

3.1.3     Decreased Stand Density 

A decrease in stand density focuses on a decrease in intraspecific competition and  
improved water availability for a single plant and thus is a measure related to water  
saving. Although decreased stand density also relates to higher evapotranspiration,  
it is beneficial under certain conditions. An increase in soil evaporation by decreasing  
plant density and/or widening row spacing depends on the prevalence of rainfall and  
is  more  during  intermittent  drought  than  in  a  prolonged  dry  span.  Besides  
evaporation, decreased radiation interception due to scattered stands might diminish  
growth and increase weed competition with crop plants such as wheat (Chen et al.  
2008),  rice  (Rees  and  Khodabaks  1994),  maize  (Barbieri  et  al.  2012),  barley  
(McKenzie et al. 2005), sugar beet (Ehlers and Goss 2016), and sorghum (Buah and  
Mwinkaara 2009). These have been investigated under different conditions and high  
yield has been observed with low stand density. 

----------------------- Page 164-----------------------

Growing Rice with Less Water: Improving Productivity by Decreasing Water Demand         153 

3.2     Soil- and Irrigation-Based Strategies 

Environmental changes will influence water accessibility, especially in rice in zones  
where water is scarce. Expanded high-temperature environments diminish rice yield  
amid the dry season when prevention measures are lacking. Water system alterations  
or improvement of appropriate water system frameworks allow water reserves while  
decreasing  the  yield  penalty  (Krishnan  et  al.  2011).  The  existing  water-saving  
technologies, for example, the alternate wetting and drying (AWD) water system,  
SSC, and aerobic rice system, appear to be the most appropriate advances in current  
rice  research  work  (Joshi  et  al.  2018).  With  a  deprived  water  system  and  poor  
administration, rice production is more affected by climatic vagaries, especially in  
tropical countries (Wassmann and Dobermann  2014). Improving technologies for  
increasing  water-use  efficiency  will  provide  long-term  economic  as  well  as  
environmental  benefits. This  would  also  decrease  soil  salinization  problems  that  
arise from irrigation (Wang et al. 2016). 

3.2.1    Alternate Wetting and Drying 

As indicated by Tuong ( 1999), by just considering evapotranspiration, 500–2000 kg  
of water are required to produce 1 kg of rice, which gives 33–50% water profitability  
(Bouman  and  Tuong  2001).  The  AWD  technique  primarily  relies  on  water  
management  by  alternately  applying  water  in  either  flooded  or  non-flooded  
conditions (Maneepitak et al. 2019). This alteration in watering the field has been  
determined  by  a  fixed  number  of  non-flooded  days,  extent  of  soil  potential,  
appearance of cracks on the soil surface, symptoms shown by plants, and a drop in  
water level below the soil surface (Pascual and Wang 2017; Sriphirom et al. 2019).  
Further, in the AWD system, water is connected to non-flooded soil for a few days  
after flooding recedes (Bouman et al. 2007). Soil type also influences the measure  
of water reserves through AWD in contrast to customary flooded rice. In loamy and  
sandy soils with deep groundwater tables, water input decreases by using AWD,  
with a 20% yield decrease, in contrast to waterlogged cropping (Singh et al. 2002).  
However,  in  soils  with  shallow  groundwater  tables,  water  input  diminishes  by  
15–30%,  accompanied  by  a  noteworthy  yield  decrease  (Carracelas  et  al. 2019).  
Grain production in AWD is usually lower than in flooded rice. However, water-use  
efficiency  (the  estimation  of  aggregate  water  used)  in AWD  is  higher,  based  on  
decreased  water  inputs  (62%)  and  decreased  yield  (25%)  (Bouman  et  al.  2007;  
Wang  et  al.  2016).  This  shows  the  higher  efficiency  of  AWD  technology  in  
comparison to persistent overflowed rice production in connection with water use  
per unit that results in a 24.6% increase in income from rice cultivation (Uddin and  
Dhar 2020). In addition to decreased water loss, AWD has been reported to decrease  
methane emissions from rice fields and decrease heavy metal accumulation in rice  
grain (Carrijo et al. 2018; Wang et al. 2019; He et al. 2020). 

----------------------- Page 165-----------------------

154                                                                                B. Singh et al. 

3.2.2     Saturated Soil Culture 

In this system, soil is kept soaked as much as could reasonably be expected to bring  
about  a  diminished  hydraulic  head  to  flooding.  This  diminishes  water  loss  by  
decreasing  leakage  and  permeation  streams  (Borrell  et  al.  1997;  Bouman  et  al.  
2007). This shallow-water system of around 1 cm of water profoundly diminishes  
water  consumption  from  10  to  25%  in  comparison  with  continuous  flooding  
(Bouman and Tuong 2001). This framework, in light of information from Tabbal  
et al. (2002), transfers the superiority of wet-seeded rice to transplanted rice with  
decreased rice yield under continuous flooding (i.e., 4% vs. 10%). Therefore, in  
both wet-seeded and transplanted rice, the water profitability under SSC was found  
to be higher than that in consistently flooded rice, in addition to the cost effectiveness  
for farmers’ acceptability (Kima et al. 2014). 

3.2.3     Aerobic Rice Development 

Aerobic rice development is used to decrease water needs since the rice is grown as  
an upland harvest with optimum yield and a supplementary water system just when  
precipitation is inadequate (Joshi et al.  2018). In this system, rice cultivars were  
sown  in  non-puddled  and  unsaturated  (vigorous)  soils  (Bouman  et  al.  2007).  
Vigorous rice cultivars have been achieved by consolidating the positive attributes  
of upland rice with those of high-yielding flooded rice (Atlin et al. 2006). During  
the mid- to late 1990s, early-maturing, oxygen-consuming, nitrogen-efficient, and  
high-yielding aerobic rice cultivars were released, such as Han Dao 502, Han Dao  
297, and Han Dao 277 (Yang et al.  2005; Joshi et al. 2018). These new cultivars  
have 50–70% less water consumption than flooded rice due to their more extended  
roots that encourage water retention and enhance air dissemination (Mitin  2009).  
Under field conditions, these aerobic cultivars produce from 4.7–6.6 t/ha to 8.0–8.8 t/ 
ha under flooded conditions (Xue et al. 2008). In addition, rice cultivars bred for the  
aerobic system must also be bred for competitive ability with weeds because of  
enhanced weed problems as soon as flooding is removed (Korres et al. 2016). Thus,  
the  traits  related  to  water  and  nutrient  acquisition  that  affect  weed-suppressive  
ability of the crop include root surface area, water uptake rate, root length, and root  
density (Korres et al. 2016). 

3.2.4     Decreasing Non-beneficial Water Depletions and Water Outflows 

A decrease in evaporation during different stages of development is achieved by  
early canopy closure via either manipulating crop density or selecting rice cultivars  
with good seedling vigor (Gouache et al. 2012; Bodner et al. 2015). These measures  
also increase the competitive ability of the crop by decreasing transpiration from  
weeds  (Korres  et  al.  2016).  In  addition,  other  methods  to  control  weeds  include  
using herbicides, manual or mechanical weeding, timely flooding, and land leveling,  

----------------------- Page 166-----------------------

Growing Rice with Less Water: Improving Productivity by Decreasing Water Demand         155 

which can help to diminish non-beneficial water losses that occur due to transpiration  
by weeds (Rodenburg et al.  2011). Soil mulching is also an effective approach to  
increase water productivity and decrease water inputs in rice, especially under non-  
saturated aerobic soil conditions (Dittert et al. 2002). Puddling in clay soils (Tuong  
et al. 2005) or soil compaction in sandy-loamy soils with clay content greater than  
5% or shallow tillage before flooding was reported to be beneficial in decreasing  
water outflows (Cabangon and Tuong 2000; Tuong et al. 2005). 

3.2.5    System of Rice Intensification 

To increase rice productivity, a climate-shrewd agroecological method is required to  
increase rice yield by altering water, soil, plant, and supplement management. The  
SRI philosophy depends on the following four fundamental rules that are connected  
with each other: early, snappy, and sound plant foundation; decreased density of  
plants; upgraded soil conditions through augmentation with organic supplements;  
and controlled and decreased application of water (Uphoff 2004; SRI-Rice 2010).  
In light of these standards, farmers can adjust prescribed SRI practices according to  
their agroecological and financial conditions. Adjustments are frequently embraced  
to handle changing soil conditions, climate designs, water control, work accessibility,  
access to natural resources, and the choice to completely depend on organic farming  
(Uddin  and  Dhar  2020).  Notwithstanding  flooded  rice,  SRI  standards  have  been  
connected to rainfed rice and to different harvests, for example, wheat, finger millet,  
sugarcane,  beets,  and  teff,  demonstrating  expanded  profitability  over  current  old  
cropping  practices. At  the  point  when  SRI  standards  are  connected  to  different  
products, we allude to it as the system of crop intensification or SCI. The advantages  
of  SRI  included  up  to  a  90%  decrease  in  seed  requirement,  20–100%  or  more  
expanded yield, and up to half water reserves. SRI standards and practices have  
been developed for rainfed rice and also for different harvests, with yield increments  
and related financial advantages (Duttarganvi et al. 2014). 

3.2.6    Sprinkler Irrigation 

The majority of cultivated rice across the globe is grown under flooded conditions,  
through which a huge amount of water is lost via deep percolation, seepage, surface  
runoff, and evapotranspiration (Vories et al. 2013; Materu et al. 2018). Among the  
various  techniques  developed  for  water-saving  irrigation,  mechanized  sprinkler  
irrigation systems are gaining attention among farmers in several countries because  
of easy management of irrigation combined with improved water-use efficiency and  
enhanced productivity (Kahlown et al. 2007; Spanu et al. 2009; Vories et al. 2017;  
Kar et al. 2018; Mandal et al. 2019; Pinto et al. 2020). In comparison to 1168 mm  
in flooded rice, a total depth of 414 mm can be achieved by sprinkler irrigation with  
a 20–50% decrease in water consumption (Vories et al.  2013; Pinto et al. 2016;  
Kumar et al. 2018). Additionally, sprinkler irrigation enables farmers to adopt soil  
conservation techniques such as no-till farming and crop rotation (Pinto et al. 2020). 

----------------------- Page 167-----------------------

156                                                                                B. Singh et al. 

4     Molecular Breeding for Rice Improvement 

To attain global food security, a promising approach is to cope with drought by  
developing drought-tolerant cultivars (Xiao et al. 2009). However, drought tolerance  
is a complex trait that involves changes at developmental, physiological, biochemical,  
and molecular levels (Joshi and Karan 2014). These changes involve alterations in  
photosynthesis,   osmotic   adjustment,   guard   cell   regulation,   root   growth,   and  
synthesis of specific proteins and antioxidants. In addition, breeders can attempt to  
improve yield through improved harvest indices, manipulating transpiration rate,  
and  decreasing  non-beneficial  depletions  (Tuong  1999;  Bennett  2003).  In  this  
regard, considerable progress has been made and several QTLs (Quantitative Trait  
Loci)  for  drought-related  traits  that  lead  to  improved  grain  yield  under  water-  
limiting  conditions  have  been  identified  and  transferred  into  suitable  varieties  
through  marker-assisted  breeding  (MAB).  However,  most  of  the  studies  were  
conducted on biparental or multiparental populations that use only allelic variations  
present  within  the  selected  parents.  In  addition,  there  is  limited  exploration  of  
genetic  resources  in  identifying  novel  QTLs  regulating  drought-related  traits  
(Kumar et al. 2014; Pascual et al. 2016). 

4.1      QTL Mapping 

QTL mapping is the genetic association between the genotypic constituents of a  
population and the trait of interest. Therefore, to map a QTL, it is mandatory to  
develop  a  mapping  population,  genotype  it,  and  make  a  linkage  map  out  of  it.  
Mapped QTLs need to be identified by their robustness and contribution toward the  
trait of interest by estimating an LOD score and phenotypic variation (PV). PV of  
more than 10% was considered as a major QTL and less than that considered as a  
minor  QTL.  Much  progress  has  already  been  made  toward  identifying  drought-  
related  traits  and  associated  genetic  factors,  that  is,  QTLs/genes  that  demarcate  
tolerant rice cultivars. Subsequently, identified genetic factors have been transferred  
into high-yielding drought-susceptible rice varieties. Using rice genetic resources,  
different QTLs targeting major drought-related traits, including yield under water-  
limiting conditions, deep rooting, osmotic- and dehydration-responsive traits, etc.,  
have been identified and transferred. For drought tolerance, several QTLs have been  
identified, although only a few have a significant effect on rice under water-limited  
conditions (Table  1). One of the QTLs for deep rooting has been identified from  
japonica cultivar Kinandang Pantong (KP) (Uga et al. 2013). Multiple QTLs related  
to  yield  under  water-limiting  conditions  have  been  identified  in  different  indica  
cultivars  and  wild  progenitors  of  cultivated  rice  Oryza  rufipogon.  Bernier  et  al.  
(2007) identified a QTL on chromosome 12 (Qtl12.1) that accounted for about 50%  
of  the  genetic  variation  and  functionally  reported  an  increased  water  uptake  of  
plants under drought stress. QTL qDTY3.1 had been identified from a cross between  

----------------------- Page 168-----------------------

Growing Rice with Less Water: Improving Productivity by Decreasing Water Demand                         157 

Table 1   Drought tolerance QTLs mapped and used for rice breeding programs 

                                        Identification  
 QTL/gene            QTL/gene           method            Cultivar/varietal group           References 
 DRO1                Deep rooting       Fine mapping      Kinandang Patong                  Uga et al.  
                                                          (KP)/japonica                     (2011, 2013) 
 DRO2                Deep rooting       Fine mapping      KP/japonica                       Uga et al.  
                                                                                            (2013) 
 DRO3                Deep rooting       Fine mapping      KP/japonica                       Uga et al.  
                                                                                            (2015) 
 QTL2, 9, and 11     Controlling        Mapping           Azucena/japonica                  Steele et al.  
                     root traits                                                            (2006, 2007,  
                                                                                            2013) 
 qtl12.1             Plant water        Mapping           Way Rarem                         Bernier et al.  
                     uptake                                                                 (2009) 
 qDTY2.3 and         Grain yield        Mapping           Vandana/cross between             Dixit et al.  
 qDTY3.2             under drought                        indica and cross product of       (2012) 
                                                         japonica  and indica 
 qDTY1.1             Grain yield        Mapping           N22/aus                           Vikram et al.  
                     under drought                                                          (2011) 
 qDTY2.2,            Grain yield        Mapping           Aday Sel                          Swamy et al.  
 qDTY4.1,            under drought                                                          (2013) 
 qDTY9.1, and  
 qDTY10.1 
 qDTY1.1             Grain yield        Mapping           Dhagaddeshi                       Ghimire et al.  
                     under drought                                                          (2012) 
 qDTY2.1 and         Grain yield in     Mapping           Apo (IR55423-01)/indica           Venuprasad  
 qDTY3.1             lowland                                                                et al. (2009) 
                     drought stress 
 Multiple root       Multiple root                        Yuefu/japonica                    Li et al.  
 traits              traits                                                                 (2005) 
 Rooting                                                  Moroberekan/japonica              Champoux  
                                                                                            et al. ( 1995) 
 QTL (osmotic        QTL (osmotic                         Co39/indica                       Lilley et al.  
 adjustment)         adjustment)                                                            (1996) 
 Multiple QTLs       Multiple QTLs                        Aus 276/aus                       Sandhu et al.  
                                                                                            (2014) 
 Multiple QTLs       Multiple QTLs                        O. rufipogon/wild                 Zhou et al.  
                                                                                            (2009) 
 Polygenes/          Polygenes/                           O. rufipogon/wild                 Hu et al.  
 multiple genes      multiple genes                                                         (2011) 
 qRL6.1              Root length                                                            Gowda et al.  
                                                                                            (2011) 

tolerant  variety  Apo  and  susceptible  variety  Swarna  showing  a  large  effect  on  
drought  tolerance  (Venuprasad  et  al.  2009).  Different  studies  identified  multiple  
DTY  QTLs  from  different  donor  rice  cultivars  such  as  Dhagaddeshi, Apo,  N22,  
Aday Sel, Way Rarem, etc., and incorporated them into rice breeding programs for  
improving drought tolerance in rice (Sandhu and Kumar 2017). 

----------------------- Page 169-----------------------

158                                                                                                                    B. Singh et al. 

4.2        Marker-Assisted Selection  

Marker-assisted selection (MAS) is a practice to substitute phenotypic screening by  
using molecular markers linked to particular loci. MAS precisely isolates the desired  
genotype at particular marker loci from a population without being a phenotype  
(Qing et al. 2019). MAS could be applied in various ways for crop improvement  
programs  such  as  the  marker-assisted  evaluation  of  breeding  material,  early-  
generation  selection,  marker-assisted  backcross  breeding,  gene  pyramiding,  and  
combined  MAS  (Collard  and  Mackill  2008).  Kumar  et  al.  (2018)  used  early-  
generation  selection  by  combining  both  phenotyping  and  genotyping  for  the  
selection  of  drought-tolerant  progenies  and  subsequently  incorporated  them  into  
their breeding programs. 

4.3        Marker-Assisted Backcrossing  

Marker-assisted backcrossing (MABC) is an efficient genetic method to transfer a  
locus controlling a trait of interest from wild relatives, landraces, and known trait-  
specific genes from a genetic material into desired cultivars, called recurrent parents,  
without  altering  their  essential  characteristics  (Dixit  et  al.  2017).  The  MABC  
scheme  includes  foreground  selection,  recombinant  selection,  and  background  
selection.  Integrating  linkage  map  information  with  a  QTL  map  helps  span  the  
markers in the target locus. Foreground selection was performed with peak markers,  
which assisted in the selection of a linked gene/QTL in the progenies while flanking  
markers  of  the  target  locus  were  used  for  recombinant  selection.  Foreground  
selection  was  performed  in  each  filial  generation.  Recombinant  selection  was  
performed  to  minimize  linkage  drag  and  decrease  the  size  of  the  target  locus  
containing the gene of interest in an elite background (Collard and Mackill 2008).  
Background selection must be performed at later stages of breeding programs to  
minimize cost and labor. After that, the BC F  or BC  generation should be selected 2 2 3 
for background selection (Ab-Jalil et al. 2018). This method is used to validate the  
function  of  QTLs  from  identified  genotypes  by  transferring  them  into  different  
genetic backgrounds (Ha et al. 2016). MABC is employed for transferring QTLs for  
different  drought  stress-related  traits  such  as  qDTYs  for  yield  under  drought  
conditions (Kumar et al.  2014); DRO1, DRO2, and DRO3 for deep rooting (Uga  
et al. 2011, 2013, 2015); qRL6.1 for root length (Gowda et al. 2011); and QTL12.1  
for plant water uptake (Bernier et al. 2009). 

4.4        Marker-Assisted Pyramiding  

Several morphological and physiological characters have been reported that con- 
tributed  to  drought  tolerance  and  each  of  the  traits  can  be  controlled  by  a  QTL  
(Sandhu  et  al.  2019).  Moreover,  individual  QTLs  can  contribute  to  yield  under  

----------------------- Page 170-----------------------

Growing Rice with Less Water: Improving Productivity by Decreasing Water Demand                                 159 

drought stress. Several important traits controlling drought tolerance are root traits,  
plant morphology, and yield under drought stress, and QTLs for these have been  
mapped  (Muthu  et  al.  2020).  Pyramiding  of  QTLs/genes  is  a  widely  followed  
approach  in  disease  resistance  breeding.  However,  polygenic  traits  governed  by  
more than one gene within the identified QTLs are complex to integrate. A significant  
amount of work has to be done for pyramiding multiple QTLs. A suitable approach  
for integrating multiple QTLs is equally important. Sometimes, integrated multiple  
QTLs  may  not  work  as  they  work  independently.  Nevertheless,  the  approach  of  
gene/QTL integration depends on the number of QTLs to be integrated, the presence  
of QTLs in the same genetic backgrounds or different ones, the distance between  
the QTL and flanking marker, the filial stage, and the recovered recurrent parent  
genome (Shamsudin et al. 2016). Less breeding time is required if the QTLs to be  
integrated  are  present  in  the  same  genetic  background  in  the  advanced  filial  
generation that recovered a higher proportion of recurrent parent genome. Genetic  
parameters such as interaction between alleles, within QTLs, and with the genetic  
background; pleiotropic effect of genes; and linkage drag of the introgressed loci  
need to be addressed (Kumar et al. 2018). For analyzing positive effects of alleles  
and other genetic effects, a large number of progenies need to be phenotyped and  
genotyped, which may correspondingly increase with the complexity of the trait  
(Kumar et al. 2018). Still, some success stories are present for MAP for drought,  
including DTY QTLs qDTY2.2  + qDTY4.1 (Swamy et al. 2013); qDTY12.1  + qDTY3.1  
(Shamsudin et al. 2016); qDTY3.2 and qDTY12.1 (Dixit et al. 2017); qDTY2.2, qDTY3.1,  
and qDTY12.1 (Shamsudin et al. 2016); and root QTLs for drought tolerance, qRT6−2,  
qRT11−7, qRT6−2, and qRT19−1+7 (Selvi et al. 2015). 

4.5      Marker-Assisted Recurrent Selection  

Marker-assisted recurrent selection (MARS) is basically increasing the frequency  
of beneficial alleles with additive and small individual effects (Bankole et al. 2017).  
Selection cycles started with parental selection (called the C  cycle) and after that 0 
three  to  four  rounds  of  recurrent  selection.  Parental  selection  can  be  carried  out  
through  genomic  selection  by  calculating  the  genomic  estimated  breeding  value  
(GEBV) across all the lines in the original populations (C ). The best linear unbiased 0 
predictor helps in predicting GEBV. Lines with the highest GEBVs were planted  
and  intercrossed. Thereafter,  subsequent  recombinant  selection  cycles  (C   to  C ) 1                        3 
were performed based on recombination of selected associated markers (Grenier  
et al. 2015; Sevanthi et al. 2019). While performing MARS, there is an increase in  
the frequency of favorable alleles and this minimizes genetic drift (Bankole et al.  
2017).  Important  points  to  be  considered  while  performing  MARS  are  allelic  
interaction, genotype by environment interactions, functions of alleles in different  
genetic  backgrounds,  and  cost  and  time  duration  of  performing  MARS.  In  rice,  
MARS is employed for incorporating DTY QTLs (qDTY1.1, qDTY2.1, qDTY3.1, and  
qDTY11.1) into a Samba Mahsuri background (Sandhu et al. 2018). 

----------------------- Page 171-----------------------

160                                                                                B. Singh et al. 

4.6      Genomic Selection 

Genomic selection (GS) is a next-generation breeding strategy that ensures speedy  
breeding  and  selection  of  desired  genotypes  for  cultivar  improvement.  GS  is  
completed  in  two  phases:  training  phase  and  breeding  phase  (Nakaya  and  Isobe  
2012). The training population is used to predict genomic values; therefore, it is  
genotyped as well as phenotyped. Based on this information, a breeding model is  
developed to calculate the GEBVs of individuals in the testing population, which is  
only genotyped. Based on the GEBVs, progenies are selected, thus increasing the  
proportion of high-performing progenies in a population and increasing the breeding  
gain  (Shikha  et  al.  2017).  GS  has  a  greater  relevance  in  cases  of  drought  as  its  
phenotyping demands extensive field screening, cost, and labor (Cabrera-Bosquet  
et al. 2012). While performing GS, genetic heterozygosity, and genotype × genotype  
and genotype × environment interaction may affect the genomic prediction. There  
is also a need for a model-based prediction of GE and GG interactions. For complex  
traits  such  as  drought,  reaction  norm  model  GEBV  has  greater  accuracy  than  
conventional models (Mulder 2016). Similarly, molecular marker-based predictions  
of crop traits are more accurate than pedigree-based predictions (Crossa 2012). 

5     Transgenic Strategies 

Transgenic studies have opened the door to the development of useful varieties that  
are superior in various traits. Because of a complex trait, different gene families are  
supposed to be upregulated or downregulated during drought stress. These genes  
belong  to  transcription  factors,  kinases,  late  embryogenesis  abundant  (LEA)  
proteins, osmoprotectants, and phytohormone families, and their transfer in different  
genotypes  showed  improved  drought  tolerance  (Joshi  et  al.  2016).  NAC  family  
genes are responsive under drought stress (Nakashima et al. 2012) and overexpression  
of  OsNAC9 showed drought tolerance in transgenic plants in field trials (Redillas  
et al. 2012). Other transcription factors such as AbEDT1 (Yu et al. 2016), SNAC1,  
SNAC2, and  OsNCED3 were upregulated in transgenic rice plants in response to  
drought stress. 
    Kinases represent a diversely fractioning gene family and enhanced drought tol- 
erance was reported in transgenic plants overexpressing calcium-dependent protein  
kinase, including OsCPK4 (Campo et al. 2014), OsCDPK7 (Saijo et al. 2000), and  
DcaCIPK9, -14, and  -16 (Wan et al. 2019). Overexpression of OsCIPK12 showed  
tolerance by increasing the accumulation of osmolytes such as proline and soluble  
sugars. Receptor-like kinase (RLK) OsSIK1 aided in drought tolerance in transgenic  
rice plants by an increased accumulation of peroxidase, catalase, and superoxide  
dismutase  and  decreased  stomatal  density  and  decreased  accumulation  of  H O  2          2 
(Ouyang  et  al.  2010).  Another  enzyme  of  the  RLK  family,  SIK2,  also  showed  
drought tolerance in transgenic rice plants (Chen et al. 2013). 

----------------------- Page 172-----------------------

Growing Rice with Less Water: Improving Productivity by Decreasing Water Demand            161 

   LEA proteins are stress inducible and play a significant role in protection under  
stress conditions (Minh et al. 2019). Reports show enhanced tolerance of drought in  
transgenic plants overexpressing  OsLEA3-1 or  OsLEA3-2 (Xiao et al. 2007; Duan  
and Cai 2012). SNAC2 protein binds to the OsOAT promoter expressing ornithine  
δ-aminotransferase  (You  et  al.  2012)  and  overexpression  of  the  OsOAT  gene  
enhanced  the  activity  of  δ-OAT  in  transgenic  rice.  This  increased  glutathione,  
proline,  and  ROS-scavenging  enzyme  activity,  resulting  in  drought  tolerance.  
Similarly,  overexpression  of  the  trehalose-6-phosphate  synthase  (OsTPS1)  gene  
expressing an enzyme in trehalose biosynthesis showed improved drought tolerance  
in transgenic rice (Li et al. 2011). Using a fusion gene from Escherichia coli coding  
for  trehalose-6-phosphate  synthase/phosphatase  under  the  control  of  an  ABA-  
inducible promoter, we generated marker-free, high-yielding transgenic rice (in an  
IR64  background)  that  can  tolerate  high  pH  (~9.9),  high  EC  (~10.0  dS/m),  and  
severe  drought  (30–35%  soil  moisture  content)  (Joshi  et  al.  2020).  Enhanced  
tolerance was observed in transgenic rice overexpressing the  OsPYL/RCA5 gene.  
Expression of stress-responsive genes was increased, resulting in enhanced drought  
tolerance  (Kim  et  al.  2010).  The  isopentyltransferase  gene  (IPT),  involved  in  
cytokinin synthesis, under control of a SAPK promoter, exhibited changes in the  
expression of genes involved in hormone homeostasis and resource mobilization,  
delay in stress response, and enhanced drought tolerance (Peleg et al. 2011). Further,  
in the expression analysis of OsM4 and OsMB11 genes, we found these genes to be  
highly  expressed  under  drought  and  salinity  stress  conditions  (Kushwaha  et  al.  
2016). We also reported that transgenic rice constitutively overexpressing SaADF2  
showed  higher  growth,  relative  water  content,  photosynthesis,  and  yield  under  
drought conditions than the wild type under drought stress conditions (Sengupta  
et al. 2019). 

6     Future Prospects 

The current challenge is a sustainable increase in rice production corresponding to  
demand. The development of high-yielding varieties resistant to diseases and insects  
and tolerant of major abiotic stresses is essential for producing enough rice under  
irrigated habitats. However, production is limited in upland and rainfed areas and  
also  under  limited  water  availability.  It  was  demonstrated  earlier  that  farmers  in  
drought-prone areas accept the decrease in yield variability offered by new stress- 
tolerant cultivars, and would be willing to pay a significant premium for these traits  
(Arora et al. 2019). Therefore, it is important to work concurrently on both aspects:  
the development of technology related to crop management and improvement of  
rice varieties for yield under adverse conditions. Climate changes further compli- 
cate the conditions for rice cultivation in these areas. This leads to intermittent rain- 
fall, enhanced flash flooding, and sporadic drought, which adversely affect cultivated  
soil. Secondary adverse effects on crop production due to climatic fluctuation are  
changes in soil stature, enhanced soil salinity, and loss of genetic diversity. Therefore,  

----------------------- Page 173-----------------------

162                                                                                   B. Singh et al. 

to mitigate these effects, researchers seek to exploit existing genetic resources. In  
the context of rice, ample germplasm accessions belong to different species and  
have been conserved ex situ and more efforts are in progress. Improvement strate- 
gies  such  as  marker-assisted  selection,  marker-assisted  backcrossing,  marker- 
assisted  pyramiding,  marker-assisted  recurrent  selection,  and  genomic  selection  
rely on QTL mapping, which itself relies on pre-breeding experiments. Pre-breeding  
strategies for the selection of cultivars to incorporate into breeding cycles are major  
components for succeeding in breeding programs. Further, transgenic approaches  
have been applied for functional validation of genes, improving quality traits, and  
developing resistant and tolerant cultivars. Thus, the development of rice cultivars  
with  improved  water-use  efficiency  will  offer  significant  economic  and  environ- 
mental benefits toward the achievement of the Sustainable Development Goals. 

Acknowledgments   We   gratefully   acknowledge   the   director,   CSIR-Institute   of   Himalayan  
Bioresource Technology, Palampur, for providing the facilities to carry out this work. CSIR support  
in the form of project MLP0201 for this study is highly acknowledged. This manuscript represents  
CSIR-IHBT communication no. 4592. 

References 

Ab-Jalil  M,  Juraimi AS, Yusop  MR,  Uddin  MK,  Hakim  MA  (2018)  Introgression  of  root  trait  
    genes for drought tolerance to a Malaysian rice variety by marker-assisted backcross breeding.  
    Int J Agric Biol 20(1):119–126 
Arora A, Bansal S, Ward PS (2019) Do farmers value rice varieties tolerant to droughts and floods?  
    Evidence from a discrete choice experiment in Odisha, India. Water Resour Econ 25:27–41 
Ashraf M, Akram NA, Al-Qurainy F, Foolad MR (2011) Drought tolerance: roles of organic osmo- 
    lytes, growth regulators, and mineral nutrients. Adv Agron 111:249–296 
Atlin GN, Lafitte HR, Tao D, Laza M, Amante M, Courtois B (2006) Developing rice cultivars for  
    high-fertility upland systems in the Asian tropics. Field Crops Res 97(1):43–52 
Bankole F, Menkir A, Olaoye G, Crossa J, Hearne S, Unachukwu N, Gedil M (2017) Genetic gains  
    in yield and yield related traits under drought stress and favorable environments in a maize  
    population improved using marker assisted recurrent selection. Front Plant Sci 8:808 
Barbieri P, Echarte L, Della Maggiora A, Sadras VO, Echeverria H, Andrade FH (2012) Maize  
    evapotranspiration and water-use efficiency in response to row spacing. Agron J 104(4):939–944 
Basu  S,  Jongerden  J,  Ruivenkamp  G  (2017)  Development  of  the  drought  tolerant  variety  
    Sahbhagi Dhan: exploring the concepts commons and community building. Int J Commons  
    11(1):144–170 
Bennett J (2003) Status of breeding for tolerance of water deficit and prospects for using molecular  
    techniques. In: Water productivity in agriculture: limits and opportunities for improvement.  
    CABI Publishing, Wallingford 
Bernier J, Kumar A, Venuprasad R, Spaner D, Atlin GN (2007) A large-effect QTL for grain yield  
    under reproductive-stage drought stress in upland rice. Crop Sci 47:507–516 
Bernier J, Kumar A, Venuprasad R, Spaner D, Verlukar S, Mandal NP, Sinha PK, Peeraju P, Dongre  
    PR, Mahto RN, Atlin GN (2009) Characterization of the effect of rice drought resistance qtl12.1  
    over a range of environments in the Philippines and eastern India. Euphytica 166:207–217 
Bodner G, Nakhforoosh A, Kaul HP (2015) Management of crop water under drought: a review.  
    Agron Sustain Dev 35(2):401–442 

----------------------- Page 174-----------------------

Growing Rice with Less Water: Improving Productivity by Decreasing Water Demand                       163 

Borrell A, Garside A, Fukai S (1997) Improving efficiency of water use for irrigated rice in a semi-  
    arid tropical environment. Field Crops Res 52(3):231–248 
Bouman BAM, Tuong TP (2001) Field water management to save water and increase its productiv- 
    ity in irrigated lowland rice. Agric Water Manag 49:11–30 
Bouman BA, Yang X, Wang H, Wang Z, Zhao J, Chen B (2006) Performance of aerobic rice variet- 
    ies under irrigated conditions in North China. Field Crops Res 97(1):53–65 
Bouman BAM, Lampayan RM, Tuong TP (2007) Water management in irrigated rice: coping with  
    water scarcity. International Rice Research Institute, Los Baños 
Boyer JS (1982) Plant productivity and environment. Science 218:443–448 
Boyer SJ (1996) Advances in drought tolerance in plants. Adv Agron 56:187–218 
Buah SS, Mwinkaara S (2009) Response of sorghum to nitrogen fertilizer and plant density in the  
    Guinea Savanna Zone. J Agron 8(4):124–130 
Cabangon RJ, Tuong TP (2000) Management of cracked soils for water saving during land prepa- 
    ration for rice cultivation. Soil Tillage Res 56(1–2):105–116 
Cabrera-Bosquet L, Crossa J, von Zitzewitz J, Serret MD, Luis Araus J (2012) High-throughput  
    phenotyping and genomic selection: the frontiers of crop breeding converge. J Integr Plant Biol  
    54(5):312–320 
Caine RS, Yin X, Sloan J, Harrison EL, Mohammed U, Fulton T, Biswal AK, Dionora J, Chater CC,  
    Coe RA, Bandyopadhyay A (2019) Rice with reduced stomatal density conserves water and  
    has improved drought tolerance under future climate conditions. New Phytol 221(1):371–384 
Campo S, Baldrich P, Messeguer J, Lalanne E, Coca M, San Segundo B (2014) Overexpression  
    of a calcium-dependent protein kinase confers salt and drought tolerance in rice by preventing  
    membrane lipid peroxidation. Plant Physiol 165(2):688–704 
Carracelas G, Hornbuckle J, Rosas J, Roel A (2019) Irrigation management strategies to increase  
    water productivity in Oryza sativa (rice) in Uruguay. Agric Water Manag 222:161–172 
Carrijo DR, Akbar N, Reis AF, Li C, Gaudin AC, Parikh SJ, Green PG, Linquist BA (2018) Impacts  
    of variable soil drying in alternate wetting and drying rice systems on yields, grain arsenic con- 
    centration and soil moisture dynamics. Field Crops Res 222:101–110 
Champoux MC, Wang G, Sarkarung S, Mackill DJ, O’Toole JC, Huang N, McCouch SR (1995)  
    Locating genes associated with root morphology and drought avoidance in rice via linkage to  
    molecular markers. Theor Appl Genet 90(7–8):969–981 
Chen C, Neill K, Wichman D, Westcott M (2008) Hard red spring wheat response to row spacing,  
    seeding rate, and nitrogen. Agron J 100(5):1296–1302 
Chen LJ, Wuriyanghan H, Zhang YQ, Duan KX, Chen HW, Li QT, Lu X, He SJ, Ma B, Zhang WK,  
    Lin Q (2013) An S-domain receptor-like kinase,  OsSIK2, confers abiotic stress tolerance and  
    delays dark-induced leaf senescence in rice. Plant Physiol 163(4):1752–1765 
Collard BC, Mackill DJ (2008) Marker-assisted selection: an approach for precision plant breeding  
    in the twenty-first century. Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci 363(1491):557–572 
Crossa J (2012) From genotype x environment interaction to gene x environment interaction. Curr  
    Genomics 13(3):225–244 
Dhakal S, Adhikari BB, Kandel BP (2020) Performance of drought tolerant rice varieties in differ- 
    ent altitudes at Duradada, Lamjung, Nepal. J Agric Nat Resour 3(1):290–300 
Ding Y, Wang W, Song R, Shao Q, Jiao X, Xing W (2017) Modeling spatial and temporal  
    variability of the impact of climate change on rice irrigation water requirements in the  
    middle and lower reaches of the Yangtze River, China. Agric Water Manag 193:89–101 
Ding Y, Wang W, Zhuang Q, Luo Y (2020) Adaptation of paddy rice in China to climate change:  
    the  effects  of  shifting  sowing  date  on  yield  and  irrigation  water  requirement. Agric  Water  
    Manag 228:105890 
Dittert K, Shan L, Kreye C, Zheng XH, Xu YC, Lu XJ, Shen QR, Fan XL, Sattelmacher B (2002)  
    Saving water with ground cover rice production systems (GCRPS) at the price of increased  
    greenhouse  gas  emissions.  In:  Water-wise  rice  production.  International  Rice  Research  
    Institute, Los Baños, pp 197–206 

----------------------- Page 175-----------------------

164                                                                                   B. Singh et al. 

Dixit S, Swamy BM, Vikram P, Ahmed HU, Cruz MS, Amante M, Atri D, Leung H, Kumar A  
    (2012) Fine mapping of QTLs for rice grain yield under drought reveals sub-QTLs conferring  
    a response to variable drought severities. Theor Appl Genet 125(1):155–169 
Dixit S, Singh A, Sandhu N, Bhandari A, Vikram P, Kumar A (2017) Combining drought and  
    submergence tolerance in rice: marker-assisted breeding and QTL combination effects. Mol  
    Breed 37(12):143 
Duan J, Cai W (2012) OsLEA3-2, an abiotic stress induced gene of rice plays a key role in salt and  
    drought tolerance. PLoS One 7(9):e45117 
Duttarganvi S, Tirupataiah K, Yella RK, Sandhyrani K, Mahendra KR, Malamasuri K (2014) Yield  
    and water productivity of rice under different cultivation practices and irrigation regimes. In:  
    International symposium on integrated water resources management (IWRM–2014), February  
    2014, Kerala, India, pp 19–21 
Ehlers  W,  Goss  M  (2016)  Water  dynamics  in  plant  productions,  2nd  edn.  CABI  Publishing,  
    Wallingford, 396 
FAO  (2018)  FAOSTAT  database  collections.  Food  and Agriculture  Organization  of  the  United  
    Nations. Food outlook biannual report on global food markets. Rome.  www.fao.org/faostat.  
    Accessed 2018 
Farooq M, Wahid A, Lee DJ, Ito O, Siddique KHM (2009) Advances in drought resistance of rice.  
    Crit Rev Plant Sci 28:199–217 
Fukai S, Pantuwan G, Jongdee B, Cooper M (1999) Screening for drought resistance in rainfed  
    lowland rice. Field Crops Res 64(1–2):61–74 
Gala Bijl C, Fisher M (2011) Crop adaptation to climate change. CSA News Magazine 5–9 
Ghimire KH, Quiatchon LA, Vikram P, Swamy BM, Dixit S, Ahmed H, Hernandez JE, Borromeo  
    TH, Kumar A (2012) Identification and mapping of a QTL (qDTY1.1) with a consistent effect  
    on grain yield under drought. Field Crops Res 131:88–96 
Gouache  D,  Le  Bris  X,  Bogard  M,  Deudon  O,  Pagé  C,  Gate  P  (2012)  Evaluating  agronomic  
    adaptation options to increasing heat stress under climate change during wheat grain filling in  
    France. Eur J Agron 39:62–70 
Gowda VR, Henry A, Yamauchi A, Shashidhar HE, Serraj R (2011) Root biology and genetic  
    improvement for drought avoidance in rice. Field Crops Res 122(1):1–13 
Grenier C, Cao TV, Ospina Y, Quintero C, Châtel MH, Tohme J, Courtois B, Ahmadi N (2015)  
    Accuracy of genomic selection in a rice synthetic population developed for recurrent selection  
    breeding. PLoS One 10(8):e0136594 
Ha T, Khang DT, Tuyen PT, Toan TB, Huong NN, Lang NT, Buu BC, Xuan TD (2016) Development  
    of new drought tolerant breeding lines for Vietnam using marker-assisted backcrossing. Int Lett  
    Nat Sci 59:1–13 
He G, Wang Z, Cui Z (2020) Managing irrigation water for sustainable rice production in China.  
    J   Clean   Prod   245:118928.   http://www.knowledgebank.irri.org/submergedsoils/index.php/ 
    rice- growing- environments/lesson- 2 
Hu BL, Fu XQ, Zhang T, Yong WA, Xia LI, Huang YH, Dai LF, Luo XD, Xie JK (2011) Genetic  
    analysis on characteristics to measure drought resistance using Dongxiang wild rice (Oryza  
    rufipogon Griff.) and its derived backcross inbred lines population at seedling stage. Agric Sci  
    China 10(11):1653–1664 
IPCC (2001) Impacts, adaptation and vulnerability. In: Contribution of the working group II to  
    the  third  assessment  report  on  the  intergovernmental  panel  on  climate  change.  Cambridge  
    University Press, Cambridge 
IPCC (2007) Climate change 2007: the physical science basis. In: Solomon S, Qin D, Manning M,  
    Chen Z, Marquis M, Averyt KB, Tignor M, Miller HL (eds) Contribution of working group I  
    to the fourth assessment report of the intergovernmental panel on climate change. Cambridge  
    University Press, Cambridge 
IRRI (2014) Standard evaluation system for rice, 5th edn. International Rice Research Institute,  
    Los Baños 

----------------------- Page 176-----------------------

Growing Rice with Less Water: Improving Productivity by Decreasing Water Demand                        165 

Jagadish SV, Murty MV, Quick WP (2015) Rice responses to rising temperatures–challenges, per- 
    spectives and future directions. Plant Cell Environ 38(9):1686–1698 
Joshi R, Chinnusamy V (2014) Antioxidant enzymes: defense against high temperature stress. In:  
    Oxidative damage to plants. Academic Press, New York, pp 369–396 
Joshi R, Karan R (2014) Physiological, biochemical and molecular mechanisms of drought toler- 
    ance in plants. In: Gaur RK, Sharma P (eds) Molecular approaches in plant abiotic stress. CRC  
    Press, Boca Raton, pp 209–231 
Joshi R, Kumar P (2012) Aerobic rice: an option for growing rice under limited water availability.  
    Indian Farming 62(2):11–14 
Joshi R, Mani SC, Shukla A, Pant RC (2009) Aerobic rice: water use sustainability. Oryza 46(1):1–5 
Joshi R, Ramanarao VM, Lee S, Kato N, Baisakh N (2014) Ectopic expression of ADP Ribosylation  
    Factor1 (SaARF1) from smooth cordgrass (Spartina alterniflora) confers drought and salt tol- 
    erance in transgenic rice and Arabidopsis . Plant Cell Tissue Organ Cult 117:17–30 
Joshi  R, Wani  SH,  Singh  B,  Bohra A,  Dar  ZA,  Lone AA,  Pareek A,  Singla-Pareek  SL  (2016)  
    Transcription factors and plants response to drought stress: current understanding and future  
    directions. Front Plant Sci 7:1029 
Joshi R, Singh B, Shukla A (2018) Evaluation of elite rice genotypes for physiological and yield  
    attributes under aerobic and irrigated conditions in tarai areas of western Himalayan region.  
    Curr Plant Biol 13:45–52 
Joshi R, Sahoo KK, Singh AK, Anwar K, Pundir P, Gautam RK, Krishnamurthy SL, Sopory SK,  
    Pareek A, Singla-Pareek SL (2020) Enhancing trehalose biosynthesis improves yield poten- 
    tial  in  marker-free  transgenic  rice  under  drought,  saline,  and  sodic  conditions.  J  Exp  Bot  
    71(2):653–668 
Kahlown MA, Raoof A, Zubair M, Kemper WD (2007) Water use efficiency and economic feasi- 
    bility of growing rice and wheat with sprinkler irrigation in the Indus Basin of Pakistan. Agric  
    Water Manag 87(3):292–298 
Kar I, Mishra A, Behera B, Khanda C, Kumar V, Kumar A (2018) Productivity trade-off with  
    different water regimes and genotypes of rice under non-puddled conditions in Eastern India.  
    Field Crops Res 222:218–229 
Kim TH, Böhmer M, Hu H, Nishimura N, Schroeder JI (2010) Guard cell signal transduction  
    network: advances in understanding abscisic acid, CO2, and Ca2+ signaling. Annu Rev Plant  

    Biol 61:561–591 
Kima AS, Chung WG, Wang YM (2014) Improving irrigated lowland rice water use efficiency  
    under saturated soil culture for adoption in tropical climate conditions. Water 6(9):2830–2846 
Korres NE, Norsworthy JK, Tehranchian P, Gitsopoulos TK, Loka DA, Oosterhuis DM, Gealy DR,  
    Moss SR, Burgos NR, Miller MR, Palhano M (2016) Cultivars to face climate change effects  
    on crops and weeds: a review. Agron Sustain Dev 36(1):12 
Krishnan  P,  Ramakrishnan  B,  Reddy  KR,  Reddy VR  (2011)  High-temperature  effects  on  rice  
    growth, yield, and grain quality. Adv Agron 111:87–206 
Kumar A, Dixit S, Ram T, Yadaw RB, Mishra KK, Mandal NP (2014) Breeding high-yielding  
    drought-tolerant  rice:  genetic  variations  and  conventional  and  molecular  approaches.  J  Exp  
    Bot 65(21):6265–6278 
Kumar GS, Ramesh T, Subrahmaniyan K, Ravi V (2018) Effect of sprinkler irrigation levels on  
    the  performance  of  rice  genotypes  under  aerobic  condition.  Int  J  Curr  Microbiol Appl  Sci  
    3:1848–1852 
Kushwaha HR, Joshi R, Pareek A, Singla-Pareek SL (2016) MATH-domain family shows response  
    toward abiotic stress in Arabidopsis and rice. Front Plant Sci 7:923 
Levitt E (1980) Chapter 4. Drought avoidance. In: Levitt E (ed) Responses of plants to environ- 
    mental stresses, vol. 2 edn. Academic Press, New York, pp 93–103 
Li Z, Mu P, Li C, Zhang H, Li Z, Gao Y, Wang X (2005) QTL mapping of root traits in a doubled  
    haploid population from a cross between upland and lowland japonica rice in three environ- 
    ments. Theor Appl Genet 110(7):1244–1252 

----------------------- Page 177-----------------------

166                                                                                        B. Singh et al. 

Li HW, Zang BS, Deng XW, Wang XP (2011) Overexpression of the trehalose-6-phosphate syn- 
    thase gene OsTPS1 enhances abiotic stress tolerance in rice. Planta 234(5):1007–1018 
Lilley JM, Ludlow MM, McCouch SR, O’Toole JC (1996) Locating QTL for osmotic adjustment  
    and dehydration tolerance in rice. J Exp Bot 47(9):1427–1436 
Lin BS, Lei H, Hu MC, Visessri S, Hsieh CI (2020) Canopy resistance and estimation of evapo- 
    transpiration above a humid cypress forest. Adv Meteorol 2020:4232138 
Lone AA, Jumaa SH, Wijewardana C, Taduri S, Redoña ED, Reddy KR (2019) Drought stress  
    tolerance screening of elite American breeding rice genotypes using low-cost pre-fabricated  
    mini-hoop modules. Agronomy 9(4):199 
Mandal KG, Thakur AK, Ambast SK (2019) Current rice farming, water resources and micro-  
    irrigation. Curr Sci 4:568–576 
Maneepitak S, Ullah H, Paothong K, Kachenchart B, Datta A, Shrestha RP (2019) Effect of water  
    and rice straw management practices on yield and water productivity of irrigated lowland rice  
    in the Central Plain of Thailand. Agric Water Manag 211:89–97 
Materu ST, Shukla S, Sishodia RP, Tarimo A, Tumbo SD (2018) Water use and rice productivity  
    for irrigation management alternatives in Tanzania. Water 10(8):1018 
McKenzie RH, Middleton AB, Bremer E (2005) Fertilization, seeding date, and seeding rate for  
    malting barley yield and quality in southern Alberta. Can J Plant Sci 85(3):603–614 
Minh BM, Linh NT, Hanh HH, Hien LT, Thang NX, Hai NV, Hue HT (2019) A LEA gene from  
    a  Vietnamese  maize  landrace  can  enhance  the  drought  tolerance  of  transgenic  maize  and  
    tobacco. Agronomy 9(2):62 
Mishra S, Singh B, Panda K, Singh BP, Singh N, Misra P, Rai V, Singh NK (2016a) Association  
    of SNP haplotypes of HKT family genes with salt tolerance in Indian wild rice germplasm.  
    Rice 9(1):1–3 
Mishra  S,  Singh  B,  Misra  P,  Rai  V,  Singh  NK  (2016b)  Haplotype  distribution  and  associa- 
    tion  of  candidate  genes  with  salt  tolerance  in  Indian  wild  rice  germplasm.  Plant  Cell  Rep  
    35(11):2295–2308 
Mitin A (2009) Documentation of selected adaptation strategies to climate change in rice cultiva- 
    tion. East Asia Rice Working Group, Quezon City, Philippines 
Mukamuhirwa A,  Persson  Hovmalm  H,  Bolinsson  H,  Ortiz  R,  Nyamangyoku  O,  Johansson  E  
    (2019) Concurrent drought and temperature stress in rice—a possible result of the predicted  
    climate change: effects on yield attributes, eating characteristics, and health promoting com- 
    pounds. Int J Environ Res Public Health 16(6):1043 
Mulder HA (2016) Genomic selection improves response to selection in resilience by exploiting  
    genotype by environment interactions. Front Genet 7:178 
Muthu V, Abbai R, Nallathambi J, Rahman H, Ramasamy S, Kambale R, Thulasinathan T, Ayyenar  
    B, Muthurajan R (2020) Pyramiding QTLs controlling tolerance against drought, salinity, and  
    submergence in rice through marker assisted breeding. PLoS One 15(1):e0227421 
Nakashima K, Takasaki H, Mizoi J, Shinozaki K, Yamaguchi-Shinozaki K (2012) NAC transcrip- 
    tion factors in plant abiotic stress responses. Biochim Biophys Acta 1819(2):97–103 
Nakaya A, Isobe SN (2012) Will genomic selection be a practical method for plant breeding? Ann  
    Bot 110(6):1303–1316 
Nguyen NV (2005) Global climate changes and rice food security. FAO, Rome, pp 24–30 
Nie L, Peng S, Bouman BAM, Huang J, Cui K, Visperas RM, Park HK (2007) Alleviation of soil  
    sickness caused by aerobic monocropping: growth response of aerobic rice to soil oven heat- 
    ing. Plant Soil 300:185–195 
Nirmala B, Babu VR, Neeraja CN, Waris A, Muthuraman P, Rao DS (2016) Linking agriculture  
    and nutrition: an ex-ante analysis of zinc biofortification of rice in India. Agric Econ Res Rev  
    29:171–177 
Ouyang SQ, Liu YF, Liu P, Lei G, He SJ, Ma B, Zhang WK, Zhang JS, Chen SY (2010) Receptor-  
    like kinase OsSIK1 improves drought and salt stress tolerance in rice (Oryza sativa) plants.  
    Plant J 62(2):316–329 

----------------------- Page 178-----------------------

Growing Rice with Less Water: Improving Productivity by Decreasing Water Demand                           167 

Pascual VJ, Wang YM  (2017)  Utilizing  rainfall  and  alternate  wetting  and  drying  irrigation  for  
    high water productivity in irrigated lowland paddy rice in southern Taiwan. Plant Prod Sci  
    20(1):24–35 
Pascual L, Albert E, Sauvage C, Duangjit J, Bitton BF, Desplat N, Brunel D, Le Paslier M, Ranc N,  
    Bruguier L, Chauchard B, Verschave P, Causse M (2016) Dissecting quantitative trait variation  
    in the resequencing era: complementarity of bi-parental, multi-parental and association panels.  
    Plant Sci 242:120–130 
Peleg Z, Reguera M, Tumimbang E, Walia H, Blumwald E (2011) Cytokinin-mediated source/sink  
    modifications improve drought tolerance and increase grain yield in rice under water-stress.  
    Plant Biotechnol J 9(7):747–758 
Pinto MA, Parfitt JM, Timm LC, Faria LC, Scivittaro WB (2016) Produtividade de arroz irrigado  
    por aspersão em terras baixas em função da disponibilidade de água e de atributos do solo. Pesq  
    Agropecu Bras 51(9):1584–1593 
Pinto MA, Parfitt JM, Timm LC, Faria LC, Concenço G, Stumpf L, Nörenberg BG (2020) Sprinkler  
    irrigation in lowland rice: crop yield and its components as a function of water availability in  
    different phenological phases. Field Crops Res 248:107714 
Qing D, Dai G, Zhou W, Huang S, Liang H, Gao L, Gao J, Huang J, Zhou M, Chen R, Chen W  
    (2019) Development of molecular marker and introgression of Bph3 into elite rice cultivars by  
    marker-assisted selection. Breed Sci 69(1):40–46 
Redillas MC, Jeong JS, Kim YS, Jung H, Bang SW, Choi YD, Ha SH, Reuzeau C, Kim JK (2012)  
    The overexpression of  OsNAC9 alters the root architecture of rice plants enhancing drought  
    resistance and grain yield under field conditions. Plant Biotechnol J 10(7):792–805 
Rees DJ, Khodabaks MR (1994) The effects of seed source and crop density on rice grown on red  
    rice-infected land in Nickerie, Suriname 
Rodenburg J, Meinke H, Johnson DE (2011) Challenges for weed management in African rice  
    systems in a changing climate. J Agric Sci 149(4):427–435 
Saijo Y,  Hata  S,  Kyozuka  J,  Shimamoto  K,  Izui  K  (2000)  Over-expression  of  a  single  Ca2+- 

    dependent protein kinase confers both cold and salt/drought tolerance on rice plants. Plant J  
    23(3):319–327 
Sandhu N, Kumar A (2017) Bridging the rice yield gaps under drought: QTLs, genes, and their use  
    in breeding programs. Agronomy 7(2):27 
Sandhu N, Singh A, Dixit S, Cruz MT, Maturan PC, Jain RK, Kumar A (2014) Identification and  
    mapping of stable QTL with main and epistasis effect on rice grain yield under upland drought  
    stress. BMC Genet 15(1):63 
Sandhu N, Dixit S, Swamy BM, Vikram P, Venkateshwarlu C, Catolos M, Kumar A (2018) Positive  
    interactions  of  major-effect  QTLs  with  genetic  background  that  enhances  rice  yield  under  
    drought. Sci Rep 8(1):1626 
Sandhu N, Dixit S, Swamy BP, Raman A, Kumar S, Singh SP, Yadaw RB, Singh ON, Reddy JN,  
    Anandan A, Yadav S (2019) Marker assisted breeding to develop multiple stress tolerant variet- 
    ies for flood and drought prone areas. Rice 12(1):8 
Schroeder JI, Delhaize E, Frommer WB, Guerinot ML, Harrison MJ, Herrera-Estrella L, Horie  
    T, Kochian LV, Munns R, Nishizawa NK, Tsay YF (2013) Using membrane transporters to  
    improve crops for sustainable food production. Nature 497(7447):60–66 
Selvi GS, Hittalmani S, Uday G (2015) Root QTL pyramiding through marker assisted selection  
    for enhanced grain yield under low moisture stress in rice (Oryza sativa L). Rice Res Open  
    Access 3:157 
Sengupta S, Mangu V, Sanchez L, Bedre R, Joshi R, Rajasekaran K, Baisakh N (2019) An actin-  
    depolymerizing factor from the halophyte smooth cordgrass,  Spartina alterniflora (Sa ADF  
    2), is superior to its rice homolog (OsADF 2) in conferring drought and salt tolerance when  
    constitutively overexpressed in rice. Plant Biotechnol J 17(1):188–205 
Sevanthi AM, Prakash C, Shanmugavadivel PS (2019) Recent progress in rice varietal develop- 
    ment  for  abiotic  stress  tolerance.  In: Advances  in  rice  research  for  abiotic  stress  tolerance.  
    Woodhead Publishing, Sawston, pp 47–68 

----------------------- Page 179-----------------------

168                                                                                        B. Singh et al. 

Shamsudin NA, Swamy BM, Ratnam W, Cruz MT, Raman A, Kumar A (2016) Marker assisted  
    pyramiding of drought yield QTLs into a popular Malaysian rice cultivar, MR219. BMC Genet  
    17(1):30 
Shikha M, Kanika A, Rao AR, Mallikarjuna MG, Gupta HS, Nepolean T (2017) Genomic selec- 
    tion for drought tolerance using genome-wide SNPs in maize. Front Plant Sci 8:550 
Singh  AK,  Choudhury  BU,  Bouman  BAM  (2002)  Effects  of  rice  establishment  methods  on  
    crop performance, water use, and mineral nitrogen. In: Bouman BAM, Hengsdijk H, Hardy  
    B, Bindraban PS, Tuong TP, Ladha JK (eds) Water-wise rice production. International Rice  
    Research Institute, Los Baños, pp 237–246 
Singh BP, Jayaswal PK, Singh B, Singh PK, Kumar V, Mishra S, Singh N, Panda K, Singh NK  
    (2015a) Natural allelic diversity in OsDREB1F gene in the Indian wild rice germplasm led to  
    ascertain its association with drought tolerance. Plant Cell Rep 34:993–1004 
Singh N, Jayaswal PK, Panda K, Mandal P, Kumar V, Singh B, Mishra S, Singh Y, Singh R, Rai  
    V, Gupta A, Singh NK (2015b) Single-copy gene based 50 K SNP chip for genetic studies and  
    molecular breeding in rice. Sci Rep 5:11600 
Singh B, Bohra A, Mishra S, Joshi R, Pandey S (2015c) Embracing new-generation ‘omics’ tools  
    to improve drought tolerance in cereal and food-legume crops. Biol Plant 59(3):413–428 
Singh  B,  Reddy  KR,  Redoña  ED,  Walker  T  (2017)  Screening  of  rice  cultivars  for  morpho-  
    physiological responses to early-season soil moisture stress. Rice Sci 24(6):322–335 
Spanu A, Murtas A, Ballone F (2009) Water use and crop coefficients in sprinkler irrigated rice.  
    Ital J Agron 4(2):47–58 
Sriphirom P, Chidthaisong A, Towprayoon S (2019) Effect of alternate wetting and drying water  
    management on rice cultivation with low emissions and low water used during wet and dry  
    season. J Clean Prod 223:980–988 
SRI-Rice (2010) SRI International Network and Resources Center, College of Agriculture and Life  
    Sciences. Cornell University, New York 
Steele KA, Price AH, Shashidhar HE, Witcombe JR (2006) Marker-assisted selection to intro- 
    gress rice QTLs controlling root traits into an Indian upland rice variety. Theor Appl Genet  
    112(2):208–221 
Steele KA, Virk DS, Kumar R, Prasad SC, Witcombe JR (2007) Field evaluation of upland rice  
    lines selected for QTLs controlling root traits. Field Crops Res 101(2):180–186 
Steele KA, Price AH, Witcombe JR, Shrestha R, Singh BN, Gibbons JM, Virk DS (2013) QTLs  
    associated  with  root  traits  increase  yield  in  upland  rice  when  transferred  through  marker-  
    assisted selection. Theor Appl Genet 126(1):101–108 
Swamy MBP, Ahmed HU, Henry A, Mauleon R, Dixit S, Vikram P, Tilatto R, Verulkar SB, Perraju  
    P, Mandal NP, Variar M (2013) Genetic, physiological, and gene expression analyses reveal that  
    multiple QTL enhance yield of rice mega-variety IR64 under drought. PLoS One 8(5):e62795 
Tabbal  DF,  Bouman  BA,  Bhuiyan  SI,  Sibayan  EB,  Sattar  MA  (2002)  On-farm  strategies  for  
    reducing  water  input  in  irrigated  rice;  case  studies  in  the  Philippines. Agric  Water  Manag  
    56(2):93–112 
Tuong TP (1999) Productive water use in rice production: opportunities and limitations. J Crop  
    Prod 2:241–264 
Tuong TP, Bouman BAM, Mortimer M (2005) More rice, less water. Plant Prod Sci 8(3):231–241 
Turner NC (2003) Drought resistance: a comparison of two research frameworks. In: Saxena NP  
    (ed) Management of agricultural drought: agronomic and genetic options. Science Publishers  
    Inc., Enfield, pp 89–102 
Uddin MT, Dhar AR (2020) Assessing the impact of water-saving technologies on boro rice farm- 
    ing in Bangladesh: economic and environmental perspective. Irrig Sci 14:1–4 
Uga Y, Okuno K, Yano M (2011) Dro1, a major QTL involved in deep rooting of rice under upland  
    field conditions. J Exp Bot 62(8):2485–2494 
Uga Y, Sugimoto K, Ogawa S, Rane J, Ishitani M, Hara N, Kitomi Y, Inukai Y, Ono K, Kanno N,  
    Inoue H (2013) Control of root system architecture by DEEPER ROOTING 1 increases rice  
    yield under drought conditions. Nat Genet 45(9):1097 

----------------------- Page 180-----------------------

Growing Rice with Less Water: Improving Productivity by Decreasing Water Demand                       169 

Uga Y, Kitomi Y, Yamamoto E, Kanno N, Kawai S, Mizubayashi T, Fukuoka S (2015) A QTL  
    for root growth angle on rice chromosome 7 is involved in the genetic pathway of DEEPER  
    ROOTING 1. Rice 8(1):1–8 
Uphoff  N  (2004)  System  of  rice  intensification  responds  to  21st  century  needs.  Rice  Today  
    42:42–43 
Urban J, Ingwers MW, McGuire MA, Teskey RO (2017) Increase in leaf temperature opens sto- 
    mata and decouples net photosynthesis from stomatal conductance in Pinus taeda and Populus  
    deltoides x nigra. J Exp Bot 68(7):1757–1767 
Venuprasad R, Dalid CO, Del Valle M, Zhao D, Espiritu M, Cruz MS, Amante M, Kumar A, Atlin  
    GN (2009) Identification and characterization of large-effect quantitative trait loci for grain  
    yield under lowland drought stress in rice using bulk-segregant analysis. Theor Appl Genet  
    120(1):177–190 
Vikram P, Swamy BM, Dixit S, Ahmed HU, Cruz MT, Singh AK, Kumar A (2011)  qDTY1.1, a  
    major QTL for rice grain yield under reproductive-stage drought stress with a consistent effect  
    in multiple elite genetic backgrounds. BMC Genet 12(1):89 
Vories ED, Stevens WE, Tacker PL, Griffin TW, Counce PA (2013) Rice production with center  
    pivot irrigation. Appl Eng Agric 29(1):51–60 
Vories E, Rhine M, Straatmann Z (2017) Investigating irrigation scheduling for rice using variable  
    rate irrigation. Agric Water Manag 179:314–323 
Wan X, Zou LH, Zheng BQ, Wang Y (2019) Circadian regulation of alternative splicing of drought-  
    associated CIPK genes in Dendrobium catenatum (Orchidaceae). Int J Mol Sci 20(3):688 
Wang Z, Zhang W, Beebout SS, Zhang H, Liu L, Yang J, Zhang J (2016) Grain yield, water and  
    nitrogen use efficiencies of rice as influenced by irrigation regimes and their interaction with  
    nitrogen rates. Field Crops Res 193:54–69 
Wang Y, Wang L, Zhou J, Hu S, Chen H, Xiang J, Zhang Y, Zeng Y, Shi Q, Zhu D, Zhang Y (2019)  
    Research progress on heat stress of rice at flowering stage. Rice Sci 26(1):1–10 
Wassmann R, Dobermann A (2014) Climate change adaptation through rice production in regions  
    with high poverty levels. J Semi-Arid Trop Agric Res 4(1):1–24 
Xiao B, Huang Y, Tang N, Xiong L (2007) Over-expression of a LEA gene in rice improves drought  
    resistance under the field conditions. Theor Appl Genet 115(1):35–46 
Xiao J, Zhuang Q, Liang E, Shao X, McGuire AD, Moody A, Kicklighter DW, Melillo JM (2009)  
    Twentieth-century  droughts  and  their  impacts  on  terrestrial  carbon  cycling  in  China.  Earth  
    Interact 13(10):1–31 
Xue  C, Yang  X,  Bouman  BA,  Deng W,  Zhang  Q, Yan W,  Zhang T,  Rouzi A, Wang  H  (2008)  
    Optimizing  yield,  water  requirements,  and  water  productivity  of  aerobic  rice  for  the  North  
    China Plain. Irrig Sci 26(6):459–474 
Yang XG, Bouman BAM, Wang HQ, Wang ZM, Zhao JF, Chen B (2005) Performance of temper- 
    ate aerobic rice under different water regimes in North China. Agric Water Manag 74:107–122 
Yang X, Wang B, Chen L, Li P, Cao C (2019) The different influences of drought stress at the flow- 
    ering stage on rice physiological traits, grain yield, and quality. Sci Rep 9(1):1–2 
You J, Hu H, Xiong L (2012) An ornithine δ-aminotransferase gene OsOAT confers drought and  
    oxidative stress tolerance in rice. Plant Sci 197:59–69 
Yu LH, Wu SJ, Peng YS, Liu RN, Chen X, Zhao P, Xu P, Zhu JB, Jiao GL, Pei Y, Xiang CB (2016)  
    Arabidopsis EDT 1/HDG 11 improves drought and salt tolerance in cotton and poplar and  
    increases cotton yield in the field. Plant Biotechnol J 14(1):72–84 
Zhou L, Chen L, Jiang L, Zhang W, Liu L, Liu X, Zhao Z, Liu S, Zhang L, Wang J, Wan J (2009)  
    Fine mapping of the grain chalkiness QTL  qPGWC-7 in rice (Oryza sativa L.). Theor Appl  
    Genet 118(3):581–590 

----------------------- Page 181-----------------------

170                                                                                   B. Singh et al. 

Open Access    This chapter is licensed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution 4.0  
International License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/), which permits use, sharing,  
adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give appropriate  
credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons license and  
indicate if changes were made. 
    The images or other third party material in this chapter are included in the chapter's Creative  
Commons license, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not  
included in the chapter's Creative Commons license and your intended use is not permitted by  
statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from  
the copyright holder. 

----------------------- Page 182-----------------------

Crop Establishment in Direct-Seeded Rice:  
Traits, Physiology, and Genetics 

Fergie Ann Quilloy, Benedick Labaco, Carlos Casal Jr, and Shalabh Dixit 

Abstract  The changing climate and water availability strongly affect the current state  
of agricultural production. While the global temperature rises, the occurrence of extreme  
climatic conditions becomes erratic. This current scenario has driven the development of  
rice varieties and cultivation practices that require less water and favor mechanization.  
Although puddled transplanted rice has been more widely used in the past, direct seed- 
ing has been gaining popularity in recent years, especially due to its water- and labor- 
saving features. This technique allows full crop establishment from seeds that were  
directly sown in the field, thus avoiding puddling, transplanting, and maintaining stand- 
ing water. Consequently, it offers promising positive environmental effects including  
decreasing  the  release  of  greenhouse  gases  and  increasing  water-use  efficiency.  
Historically, rice varieties bred for transplanting are also used in direct seeding, which  
limits the maximum yield potential of field trials. The success of direct seeding relies  
strongly on the development of rice varieties with robust crop establishment. Anaerobic  
germination,  seed  longevity,  and  early  seedling  vigor  are  the  key  traits  required  to  
achieve this. This chapter expounds on the physiology, molecular mechanisms, genetics,  
and relevance of the enumerated traits for direct seeding. A brief discussion of breeding  
for rice varieties with improved germination under direct seeding is also provided. 

Keywords  Direct seeded rice · Anaerobic germination · Seed longevity · Early  
seedling vigor 

1      Introduction 

Rice  is  grown  on  close  to  160  million  ha  of  land  across  the  world,  producing  
700 million t of paddy. Notably, more than 90% of the worldwide rice supply is  
cultivated and consumed in Asia (Fig. 1). A significant volume of this production is  

The  original  version  of  this  chapter  was  revised. The  author  sequence  has  now  been  updated.  
The correction to this chapter is available at https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-66530-2_15 

F. A. Quilloy · B. Labaco · C. Casal Jr · S. Dixit ()  
Rice Breeding Platform, International Rice Research Institute, Metro Manila, Philippines 
e-mail: f.quilloy@irri.org; b.labaco@irri.org; s.dixit@irri.org; c.casal@irri.org 

© The Author(s) 2021, Corrected Publication 2021                                                   171 
J. Ali, S. H. Wani (eds.), Rice Improvement,  
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-66530-2_6 

----------------------- Page 183-----------------------

172                                                                              F. A. Quilloy et al. 

Fig. 1   2017 worldwide (a) milled rice production (tons) and (b) total rice consumption. (Data  
retrieved from http://ricestat.irri.org:8080/wrs2/, June 2018) 

contributed by small and marginal farm holdings that principally grow rice with  
limited inputs under an unpredictable water supply. Rice can be categorized into  
different types based on the topographical location where it is grown and the pre- 
vailing ecosystem. Topographically, rice is grouped into five main classes: upland,  
shallow  lowland,  mid-lowland,  semi-deep,  and  deepwater  ecosystems.  Further,  
these ecosystems are classified as irrigated or rainfed based on the availability of  
irrigation water. In cases where water is maintained throughout most of the crop  
growth period (80%), the area is classified as irrigated. However, rainfed areas are  

----------------------- Page 184-----------------------

Crop Establishment in Direct-Seeded Rice: Traits, Physiology, and Genetics                         173 

those  where  the  sole  water  source  is  rainfall  and  ponded  water  availability  is  
uncertain. 
    The start of the Green Revolution led to a marked change in plant architecture  
and cultivation practices that primarily suited highly productive irrigated environ- 
ments. Several varieties of rice with promising yield potential and input responsive- 
ness were developed and adapted across irrigated and rainfed rice-growing areas.  
Although this was advantageous in increasing grain yield, the consequences of the  
Green Revolution came with an environmental cost. As noted by Pingali (2012), the  
policy underlying the Green Revolution prompted misguided overuse of fertilizer  
and crop intensification in unbefitting environments. On a sizable scale, the environ- 
ment is subjected to unintended consequences such as soil degradation, water-table  
diminution, and chemical runoff, which ultimately contribute to the escalating cli- 
mate change. 
    This review aims to summarize crop establishment practices in rice in relation to  
climate change and water scarcity. We begin by describing the current state of cli- 
mate change and the need for new crop management approaches to mitigate the  
worsening conditions. The review then summarizes major crop establishment meth- 
ods in rice and demonstrates their suitability to varying growth scenarios. Further,  
the review discusses crop establishment in direct-seeded rice in detail covering rel- 
evant  traits  with  their  underlying  physiology  and  genetics.  Finally,  we  briefly  
describe the breeding approach to systematically include new traits in programs on  
direct-seeded rice breeding. 

2      Climate Change and Water Scarcity 

The state of the environment strongly affects the world’s agricultural capacity (FAO  
2016). Climate change and water scarcity are two developing stories that confound  
                                                                                    3 
the downside in agricultural production. Annually, a total of 3853 km  of groundwa- 
                                                          3 
ter is withdrawn, 69% of which (i.e., 2769 km ) is used for agricultural irrigation  
while 19% and 12% are allocated for industry and municipalities, respectively (FAO  
2016). The repercussions of climate change are believed to drastically affect the  
water and agricultural status of the world. Predictions suggest that climate change  
can  elicit  an  increase  in  temperature,  a  shift  in  the  patterns  of  precipitation,  the  
occurrence of more extreme climatic events, and further water deficit (Barker 2009). 
    Climate is described as the environmental condition over a location in a span of  
30 years. Temperature and precipitation are two of the most pressing factors that  
regulate Earth’s climate. Remarkably, over the past 100 years, an average increase  
of 0.74 °C has been recorded in the global surface temperature (IPCC 2007) as a  
result of the increase in atmospheric methane, nitrous oxide, and other greenhouse  
gases (GHGs). Since rainfall has a direct relationship with temperature, the amount  
of annual rainfall scales up with temperature. In the past 100 years, there has been  
an increase of 2% in overall precipitation; however, because this has large regional  
discrepancies,   the   benefits   have   been   limited   (IPCC   2007).   Moreover,   the  

----------------------- Page 185-----------------------

174                                                                               F. A. Quilloy et al. 

occurrence of extreme climatic events is increasing and this leads to a decline in rice  
production.  Long-term  experiments  on  rice  yields  coupled  with  crop  simulation  
models have reported that the yield decline can partly be attributed to the fluctuating  
climatic conditions (Aggarwal 2008). Figure 2 illustrates the average yearly precipi- 
tation across different countries in 2011. Notably, some of the major rice-producing  
countries such as Vietnam, Myanmar, Thailand, the Philippines, Bangladesh, Nepal,  
India, Burundi, and Nigeria also have the highest precipitation rates (Kreft et al.  
2016). In India, for example, it was estimated that the variability in temperature and  
rainfall  would  result  in  a  10–40%  loss  in  agricultural  production  by  2080–2100  
(Aggarwal et al. 2010). Projection models suggest that direct climate impacts on  
maize, soybean, wheat, and rice production can account for losses of 400–1400 Pcal  
(8–24% of the current total) (Elliott et al.  2014). As mentioned by Barker et al.  
(1998), the world must develop and advocate for policies, investments, and infra- 
structure that can adapt to the ever-changing climatic parameters. 
    Water scarcity is a state when water is insufficient to meet the demand of all sec- 
tors of a particular place or demography. It has diverse origins, including decreasing  
water tables, declining water quality, faulty irrigation systems, and growing water  
competition from industrial and urban sectors (Bouman et al. 2007). It can be cate- 
gorized into two major types: physical and economic water scarcity. 
    Physical water scarcity, in its simplest form, occurs when water resources are  
depleted;  hence,  the  water  supply  is  not  able  to  meet  human  and  environmental  
demand  (Molden  2007;  OCHA  2010). As  further  discussed  by  Molden  (2007),  
physical scarcity is commonly associated with, but not limited to, arid areas. It also  
occurs in areas with an abundant water supply yet the resources (i.e., irrigation) are  
allocated only to certain sectors. 

Fig. 2   Average yearly precipitation (cm) across different countries. (Image retrieved from https:// 
nelson.wisc.edu, July 2018) 

----------------------- Page 186-----------------------

Crop Establishment in Direct-Seeded Rice: Traits, Physiology, and Genetics                          175 

    Economic water scarcity is due to the lack of capability to withdraw water given  
that there is a sufficient amount of reserve (Molden 2007; OCHA 2010). This relates  
to the lack of infrastructure to enable the withdrawal of water. However, this is also  
linked to the inequitable allocation of infrastructure; hence, the water supply is lim- 
ited to certain groups. Signs indicative of economic water scarcity are inadequate  
infrastructure  development,  high  cost  of  irrigation,  fluctuating  water  availability,  
flooding, and long-term drought. Therefore, it is important to address the proper  
management  of  water  resources  to  maximize  water  utility  and  prevent  water  
contamination. 
    Physical and economic water scarcities are widespread across different coun- 
tries. As of 2016, it was revealed that about four billion people suffer from water  
scarcity for at least 60 days in a year (Mekonnen and Hoekstra 2016). In Asia alone,  
it is expected that per capita water availability will decline across different countries  
                                                                                      3 
by 2050 (Fig.  3). This decline could range from 1911 to 63,135 m  for different  
countries (Kumar and Ladha 2011). Several reasons are reported to be causing this  
decline, such as booming population, decreasing water table, deteriorating water  
quality, inept irrigation, and rising competition with nonagricultural sectors (Kaur  
and Singh 2017). 
    It is estimated that approximately four billion people worldwide are constrained  
by extreme water scarcity for blue water (fresh surface water and/or groundwater  
that is extracted from the earth and not returned due to evaporation into the atmo- 
sphere or incorporation into a product), of which more than half are from China and  
India  (Mekonnen  and  Hoekstra  2016),  two  of  the  highest  rice-producing Asian  

Fig. 3   Per capita water availability (in cubic meters) based on population growth rate among dif- 
ferent rice-producing countries across 100 years (1950–2050). (Source: Kumar and Ladha 2011) 

----------------------- Page 187-----------------------

176                                                                                        F. A. Quilloy et al. 

countries. Therefore, it can be expected that physical and economic water scarcities  
are going to induce a sharp deterioration in agriculture’s portion of freshwater allo- 
cation in Asia. 
    Water is also lost in the field throughout the cropping season because of factors  
such as surface runoff, seepage, percolation, evaporation, and transpiration (Bouman  
et al. 2007). However, only water loss through transpiration is considered to be pro- 
ductive since this is useful for plant growth and development. Although 1432 L of  
water are needed to produce 1 kg of rough rice (Rice Knowledge Bank 2017), only  
about  10%  of  the  total  absorbed  water  is  used  by  the  plant  for  its  development  
(Chavarria and dos Santos 2012). To this end, a large portion of water input becomes  
unused, leading to a loss in farmers’ investments. In the present-day scenario of water  
scarcity, the puddled transplanted system of rice is becoming increasingly unsustain- 
able. With more than 90% of global rice being cultivated and expended in Asia and the  
large water requirements of conventional rice cultivation systems, it is evident that  
water scarcity is going to severely affect rice production on the continent. The high  
water requirement of puddled transplanted rice makes it more vulnerable to water  
scarcity and demands more drastic changes in cultivation practices than in other crops. 

3      Rice Establishment Methods 

Historically, in Asia, direct seeding was a preferred cultivation practice over trans- 
planting (Grigg  1974). Although transplanting was more labor- and input-intensive,  
it provided a yield advantage and was later adopted due to the increased availability  
of labor because of drastic population expansion. In the sections below, we describe  
the two main cultivation practices popular in Asia. 

3.1      Puddled Transplanted Rice  

Transplanting 20–30-day-old seedlings in puddled soil is currently the most pre- 
ferred practice in Asia. Puddling decreases water seepage by compacting the soil  
during land preparation, which improves weed suppression, eases seedling estab- 
lishment, and creates an anaerobic condition that increases soil nutrient availability  
(e.g., zinc, iron, and phosphorus) (Fanish 2016). Puddling ensures high crop growth  
and yield but it is not the most water- and labor-efficient option (Dixit et al. 2016).  
Rice requires two to three times more water than other cereals (Barker et al.  1998),  
especially when it is grown under puddled conditions lasting to about 80% of the  
crop’s growth duration. Moreover, repeated puddling damages soil properties such  
that the soil aggregates are dismantled, the permeability of the soil subsurface layers  
decreases, and, at shallow depth, hard-pans are formed. Also, puddled transplanted  
rice (PTR) requires longer crop duration due to the delay in plant maturity caused  
by transplanting shock and nursery time. Although transplanting is favored by low  

----------------------- Page 188-----------------------

Crop Establishment in Direct-Seeded Rice: Traits, Physiology, and Genetics                               177 

wages  and  adequate  water  supply,  the  decreasing  labor  and  water  availability  in  
most rice-growing regions in Asia requires a shift in cultivation practices to make  
rice farming a sustainable and profitable enterprise. 

3.2      Direct-Seeded Rice  

The current climate and social scenarios in Asia have led to increased efforts in  
developing rice varieties and cultivation practices requiring less water and favoring  
mechanization. These include operations such as direct seeding and alternate wet- 
ting and drying. Among all the water-saving technologies, dry direct seeding is the  
most water-efficient and it favors mechanization, which reduces labor requirements. 
    Direct seeding is the crop establishment practice from seeds that were directly  
sown in the field instead of transplanting seedlings grown from the nursery. It comes  
mainly  in  three  forms:  dry  direct-seeded  rice  (dry-DSR),  wet  direct-seeded  rice  
(wet-DSR), and water seeding. Kumar and Ladha (2011) described and differenti- 
ated these methods based on field conditions. Dry-DSR involves broadcasting, dib- 
bling, or drilling of dry seeds on unpuddled soil, which was either conventionally  
tilled or not tilled at all. Meanwhile, wet-DSR is done by sowing pregerminated rice  
seeds onto or into puddled soil and is known as aerobic and anaerobic wet-DSR,  
respectively. Lastly, water seeding uses pregerminated seeds that are broadcast onto  
the field with standing water. In this case, the field may be either puddled (wet-water  
seeding) or unpuddled (dry-water seeding). 
    DSR  is  considered  as  an  opportunity  to  advance  rice  production  practices  in  
water-scarce areas into a high-water-use-efficient cultivation practice (Fanish 2016).  
Through  dry  direct  seeding,  three  basic  field  operations  are  avoided:  puddling,  
transplanting,  and  maintaining  4–5  cm  of  standing  water  throughout  the  season.  
Further, PTR fields are one of the biggest sources of greenhouse gases, particularly  
methane.  As  reported  by  Pathak  et  al.  (2013),  in  the  districts  of  Punjab,  DSR  
decreased total global warming potential by about 33%, from 2.0 to 4.6 t CO  eq./2 
ha to 1.3–2.9 t CO  eq./ha. In DSR, the production of both methane and carbon 2 
dioxide was less than that in PTR. This shows the promising positive effects of DSR  
on the environment. 
    DSR is also known for its water- and labor-saving attributes. It is reported to save  
around 30% of water (Fanish 2016) and 11.2% of labor costs (Akhgari and Kaviani  
2011). Apart from this, the labor requirement for DSR is spread out through the  
season, promoting mechanization and the use of family labor instead of depending  
on hired labor. This makes rice farming more profitable for farmers and also allows  
continued operations throughout the season despite labor unavailability. Furthermore,  
DSR saves the plants from transplanting injury; hence, the plants reach physiologi- 
cal maturity in fewer days and this leads to early crop maturity. 
    In general, PTR varieties are also used in direct seeding. The unavailability of  
proper varieties developed for direct seeding is a major constraint to exploiting its  
maximum yield potential. Historically, previous approaches to the improvement of  

----------------------- Page 189-----------------------

178                                                                                     F. A. Quilloy et al. 

crop establishment in DSR involved refining cultural practices rather than rice vari- 
etal improvement. Ultimately, the success of DSR relies heavily on breeding for  
varieties with anaerobic germination (AG) tolerance, seed longevity, early seedling  
vigor, and the ability to germinate from deep soil. 

4      Traits, Physiology, Genetics, and Breeding 

4.1      Anaerobic Germination  

Poor crop establishment remains a concern in areas that experience flooding after  
sowing  and  where  fields  are  not  properly  leveled  (Ismail  et  al.  2009).  Flooding  
negatively  affects  germination  and  survival  in  most  rice  genotypes  (Ismail  et  al.  
2012). Conversely, it suppresses the growth of weeds and shrinks the cost of physi- 
cal weeding and/or herbicide application. It is projected that approximately 30% of  
the total cultivation cost is saved when weed emergence is suppressed by flood. 
    The ability of seeds to sprout, grow, and survive under low oxygen (hypoxia) or  
very little to no oxygen (anoxia) is known as AG. This trait is a must-have for all  
direct-seeded rice systems. The trait ensures risk mitigation at the early stages of the  
crop and can be used as a weed control mechanism. The majority of the modern  
high-yielding  rice  varieties  do  not  show  any  germination  underwater.  However,  
landraces that can maintain germination under flooded conditions have evolved in  
various parts of rice-growing areas. Some examples of such tolerant landraces are  
Khao Hlan On, Ma Zhan (red), Kalarata, Nanhi, and Khaiyan. Results of donor  
identification studies have shown tolerant landraces spread across all major groups  
of rice. However,  indica and  aus landraces have been used in genetic studies and  
breeding programs more than the other groups so far. Khao Hlan On and Ma Zhan  
(red) are currently used extensively as donors of the trait in breeding and marker-  
assisted selection (MAS) programs at the International Rice Research Institute (IRRI). 

4.1.1      Physiology and Molecular Mechanisms of AG 

Rice is the only cereal that can withstand water submergence; hence, it grows even  
under hypoxic conditions. In extreme conditions, submerged plants can experience  
anoxia when subjected to prolonged flooding. Under anoxia, the plant shifts to an  
alcoholic fermentation (AF) pathway rather than respiration for energy, in the form  
of adenosine triphosphate (ATP). During AF, only two ATPs are being produced  
vis-à-vis 38 ATPs are produced in aerobic respiration (Magneschi and Perata 2009).  
Therefore, the plant is 19 times less efficient in ATP production when exposed to  
anaerobic conditions. Notably, three common physiological responses allow rice  
seedlings to survive under anaerobic conditions: (1) longer coleoptile, (2) greater  
water imbibition, and (3) higher starch reserves. 

----------------------- Page 190-----------------------

Crop Establishment in Direct-Seeded Rice: Traits, Physiology, and Genetics                             179 

    According to Pradet and Bomsel, in 1978 (as cited by Kennedy et al.  1980), the  
only plant organ that can grow under anoxia is the rice coleoptile. Through coleop- 
tile elongation, the plant can gain access to aeration, which enables the germination  
of the developing embryo (Ismail et al. 2012). Because of this, AG tolerance can be  
indirectly measured using coleoptile length. Hsu and Tung (2015) referred to this  
trait as the “anaerobic response index.” Alpi and Beevers ( 1983) demonstrated that  
seedlings develop coleoptiles at a higher speed when subjected to low environmen- 
tal O  concentration. However, they further observed that, despite its greater length, 2 
the coleoptile is thin and fragile with less fresh weight. This phenomenon can be  
referred to as the snorkel effect, whereby anoxia induces the development of a hol- 
low coleoptile to access a better-aerated environment (Kordan 1974). This provides  
oxygen supply for the plant’s root and endosperm, which supports complete and  
vigorous seedling establishment. Adachi et al. (2015) evaluated the germination of  
tolerant (IR06F459) and intolerant (IR42) rice lines and revealed that the coleoptiles  
of IR06F459 had significantly longer coleoptiles than those of IR42. IR06F459 is an  
AG-tolerant line developed from backcrossing IR64 to Khao Hlan On. In addition,  
Ismail et al. (2009) revealed that water stress during germination decreased shoot  
and root length of intolerant genotypes by 81% and 68%, respectively (Fig. 4). This  
was incomparable to the decrease of 61% in shoot length and 7% in root length of  
the tolerant genotypes. 
    During flooding, seeds experience oxygen-limiting conditions. Under these con- 
ditions, the plant requires above-normal tolerance of anoxia to exhibit strong seed  
germination and growth (Ismail et al. 2009). In  1996, Yamauchi revealed that the  
use of genotypes that can withstand anaerobic conditions could help improve seed- 
ling establishment, weed control, and lodging resistance in DSR. Hence, the utility  
of genotypes with high germination rate (i.e., coleoptile and mesocotyl elongation)  
and seedling vigor under anaerobic conditions can curtail problems in crop estab- 
lishment  and  even  weed  competition  (Azhiri-Sigari  et  al.  2005). As  revealed  by  
Ismail et al. (2009) in their evaluation of tolerant (Cody, Khaiyan, Nanhi, and Khan  
Hlan  On)  and  intolerant  (FR13A,  IR22,  IR28,  IR42,  and  IR64)  genotypes,  the  

Fig. 4   Mean shoot and  
root lengths of five  
flooding-tolerant and five  
flooding-sensitive  
genotypes of rice measured  
21 days after sowing under  
control and flooded  
(10 cm) conditions. Values  
in parentheses are  
percentage decreases in  
length relative to the length  
in the control. Vertical bars  
indicate l.s.d. at p = 0.05.  
(Source: Ismail et al. 2009) 

----------------------- Page 191-----------------------

180                                                                             F. A. Quilloy et al. 

Fig. 5   Percentage survival of two tolerant (Khao Hlan On and Ma Zhan (red)) and two intolerant  
(IR64 and IR42) varieties after 7, 14, and 21 days of submergence (DAS) in 8 cm of water 

survival of both groups decreased but there was a markedly larger decrease in the  
survival  of  the  intolerant  genotypes  (Fig.  5).  Among  these  tolerant  genotypes,  
Khaiyan and Khao Hlan On displayed the highest survival rates, whereas the intol- 
erant genotypes recorded a survival percentage of only about 5%. 
    The rapid germination of AG lines was credited by El-Hendawy et al. (2011) to  
rapid water imbibition under submerged conditions. They evaluated 58 contrasting  
genotypes,  which  showed  a  strong  negative  correlation  (r  =  −0.46, p  <  0.001)  
between water uptake and germination time. Further, the authors performed cluster  
analysis of the lines based on water content over different times of seed imbibition  
and revealed that tolerant genotypes clustered together within the group, which was  
characterized by rapid water uptake. Together, this suggests that high water uptake  
can induce rapid seed germination under anoxia. A proposed mechanism of action  
is that water uptake promotes sugar mobilization from the endosperm to the devel- 
oping embryo (El-Hendawy et al. 2011), which provides energy for plant growth. 
    Apart from efficient water imbibition, carbohydrate content has the potential to  
enable plant growth under water stress. Ella and Setter ( 1999) suggested that the  
adverse effect of decreased ATP supply during AF is relieved when more carbohy- 
drate is available for breakdown. As such, seeds with high starch content are deemed  
more tolerant of AG than seeds with high fat content (Magneschi and Perata 2009).  
Under anoxia, plant survival was found to be strongly correlated to starch content  
(r  =  0.73–0.88)  (Ella  and  Setter  1999).  However,  starch  cannot  be  used  as  it  is;  
hence, some also hypothesize the role of α-amylases, which are responsible for the  
breakdown of starch into soluble sugar (El-Hendawy et al. 2011). Rice, among the  
cereal crops under anoxia, is the only crop that expresses α-amylase mRNA (Perata  
et al.  1992, 1993). Also, a rice seed grown under anoxia expresses the whole set of  
enzymes needed for starch breakdown into its soluble forms (Ismail et al.  2009).  
These  amylases  regulate  starch  degradation  to  glucose,  which  is  needed  in  the  
plants’ fermentative metabolism that is activated for ATP production under anoxia  

----------------------- Page 192-----------------------

Crop Establishment in Direct-Seeded Rice: Traits, Physiology, and Genetics                 181 

(Septiningsih  et  al.  2013). Adachi  et  al.  (2015)  reported  in  their  study  that  the  
α-amylase activity in their tolerant line (IR06F459) was significantly higher than in  
the intolerant line (IR42). This was also in agreement with the findings of Illangakoon  
et al. (2016), for which the survival rates of their genotypes were positively corre- 
lated with α-amylase activity (r = 0.79) and soluble sugar content (r = 0.74). Ismail  
et al. (2009) reported that the soluble sugar concentration remained low for both  
tolerant and intolerant genotypes until the tolerant genotypes had higher soluble  
sugar at 4–8 days after sowing. These findings suggest that tolerant genotypes can  
break down carbohydrate reserves in the seed and mobilize the resulting monosac- 
charide,  which  can  enable  germination  and  growth  under  hypoxia.  In  2015,  
Kretzschmar et al. found that OsTPP7 was expressed in the germinating tissues of  
a NIL-AG1 (tolerant) line while its expression was absent in IR64 (susceptible).  
Given that  OsTPP genes (i.e.,  OsTPP1 and  OsTPP2) in rice convert trehalose- 6-  
phosphate (T6P) to trehalose, this mechanism can also be true for OsTPP7. Further  
analysis revealed that trehalose and sucrose were 2.3-fold and 2.0-fold higher in  
NIL-AG1 than in IR64. This suggests that OsTPP7 affects the conversion of T6P to  
trehalose,  which  signals  low  sugar  availability;  consequently,  the  plant  enables  
starch mobilization from the endosperm reserve (source) to the coleoptile (sink). 
   Expression analysis, through RNA sequence (RNA seq), revealed that RAmy3D  
was highly expressed in tolerant genotypes under anoxia (Ismail et al. 2009). RAmy3D  
is a member of the Amy3 gene subfamily, which was found to be upregulated in rice  
embryos  under  anoxia  (Hwang  et  al.  1999).  RAmy3D,  unlike  RAmy1A  from  the  
Amy1 gene subfamily, lacks the gibberellic acid (GA)-responsive element in its pro- 
moter  region  (Lu  et  al.  1998)  and  is  important  in  oligosaccharide  degradation  
(Terashima et al. 1997). Under starvation, a glucose and sucrose receptor, RAmy3D,  
is activated by protein kinase SnRK1A (Lu et al. 2007). Meanwhile, SnRK1A is stim- 
ulated by calcineurin B-like protein kinase (CIPK15) under oxygen- limiting condi- 
tions  (Kudahettige  et  al.  2010). Additionally,  the  interaction  of  calcineurin  B-like  
proteins, such as CBL4 and CBL5, with CIPK15 under anoxia is viewed as a regulat- 
ing mechanism in plant response during anoxia (Ho et al. 2017; Sadiq et al. 2011). 
   Although many other rice enzymes are downregulated during anoxia to inacti- 
vate energy-conserving steps, pyruvate decarboxylase (PDC), alcohol dehydroge- 
nase (ADH), and aldehyde dehydrogenase (ALDH) are active in genotypes tolerant  
of anoxia (i.e., Khaiyan), as reported by Ismail et al. (2009). The upregulation of  
these enzymes proposes enhanced alcohol fermentation during anoxia, which uses  
nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NAD) for glycolysis and substrate-level phos- 
phorylation  (Saika  et  al.  2006;  Shingaki-Wells  et  al.  2011). As  a  result,  enough  
energy and carbon are supplied to the developing coleoptile under anoxia. Moreover,  
rice coleoptiles under anoxic conditions have been reported to exhibit a decrease in  
pH, which also suggests alcoholic fermentation pathway activation. In 2009, Ismail  
et al. showed that the concentration of ethylene increased significantly after only  
3 days of imbibition. They also reported that the ethylene produced affects starch  
hydrolysis through the reduction of abscisic acid (ABA) synthesis while upregulat- 
ing the synthesis of and sensitivity to gibberellic acid (GA) of the internode tissue.  
This  enhances  starch  catabolite  enzyme  activity  under  stress,  which  enables  

----------------------- Page 193-----------------------

182                                                                               F. A. Quilloy et al. 

seedling  growth  and  survival  under  AG.  Further,  ethylene  promotes  coleoptile  
growth through cell expansion by regulating enzymes such as peroxidases, which  
are responsible for cell wall rigidity. Peroxidase activity decreases the plant cell  
wall’s lignin content and protein assembly (Waffenschmidt et al.  1993), which in  
turn decreases its rigidity and permits cellular elongation. Figure 6 shows the pro- 
posed mechanism of coleoptile elongation under anoxia as interpreted by Ismail  
et al. (2009). 
    Other factors that are deemed responsible for cell expansion are a group of non- 
enzymatic proteins called expansins, which can affect cell wall loosening. These  
proteins attach at the cell wall interface between cellulose microfibrils and matrix  
polysaccharides, which results in a disturbance of non-covalent bonds, enabling cell  
wall loosening (McQueen-Mason and Cosgrove  1995). Thus far, EXPA2, EXPA4,  
EXPA7,  EXPB12,  EXPA1,  EXPB11,  and  EXPB17  were  reported  to  be  induced  
during  submergence  stress  (Juang  et  al.  2000;  Lasanthi-Kudahettige  et  al. 2007;  
Takahashi et al. 2011). 

Fig. 6   Proposed mechanisms involved in enhancing germination and seedling growth under low-  
oxygen stress in rice. (Source: Ismail et al. 2009) 

----------------------- Page 194-----------------------

Crop Establishment in Direct-Seeded Rice: Traits, Physiology, and Genetics                       183 

4.1.2     Genetic Factors Underlying the AG Trait 

Before evaluating the genetics behind AG, it was necessary to identify lines that can  
germinate under very limited oxygen supply. The largest AG screening conducted  
has been that of Angaji et al. in 2010. They screened 8000 rice accessions from the  
IRRI Genetic Resources Center, which contains collections from gene bank acces- 
sions, elite breeding lines, IR64 mutants, and introgression lines. However, only  
0.23% (19 lines) showed greater than or equal to 70% survival, a subset of which is  
present in Table 1. Nevertheless, Hsu and Tung (2017) evaluated gene expression in  
six genotypes and discovered 3597 genes affected by water stress irrespective of the  
plant’s  genetic  background,  5100  genes  differentially  affected  across  genotypes,  
and 471 genes affected in a genotype-dependent manner. Hence, the different geno- 
types are expected to display different degrees of tolerant response to anoxia. 
    Both quantitative trait loci (QTL) mapping and genome-wide association studies  
(GWAS) are useful in identifying genomic regions underlying different phenotypic  
traits. QTL mapping uses markers for a trait of interest, which can categorize the  
sample population into genotypic groups (Sehgal et al.  2016), while GWAS link  
common single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) to phenotypic traits, which can  
provide information on the association between particular genetic variants and phe- 
notype (Pal et al.  2015). Table  2 summarizes the results of some of the previous  
QTL mapping studies for AG tolerance using different rice landraces as sources. 
    In 2004, Jiang et al. evaluated 81 recombinant inbred lines (RILs) from a japon- 
ica/indica cross, Kinmaze/DV85. Kinmaze germinates well under anoxia; hence, it  
was used as the donor parent. These RILs were screened using 137 restriction frag- 
ment length polymorphism (RFLP) markers and five QTLs were detected on chro- 
mosomes 1, 2, 5, and 7. These QTLs explained phenotypic variation ranging from  

Table 1   Rice accessions                     Cultivar                 Origin         Survival (%) 
tolerant of anaerobic  
                                              Khaiyan                  Bangladesh     90 
germination together with  
                                              Ma-Zhan (red)            China          90 
three sensitive checks, IR42,  
IR64, and FR13A. Source:                      Kalongchi                Bangladesh     90 
Angaji et al. (2010)                          Sossoka                  Guinea         85 
                                              Kaolack                  Guinea         85 
                                              Dholamon 64-3            Bangladesh     80 
                                              Nanhi                    India          80 
                                              Khao Hlan On             Myanmar        75 
                                              IR68552-100-1-2-2-2      NPT-IRRI       75 
                                              Cody                     USA            70 
                                              Liu-Tiao-Nuo             China          70 
                                              IR64 (sensitive)                        20 
                                              FR13A (sensitive)                       20 
                                              IR42 (sensitive)                       5 

----------------------- Page 195-----------------------

184                                                                             F. A. Quilloy et al. 

Table 2   Summary of QTLs detected for anaerobic germination identified from different studies 
 Locus       Chr    LOD       R2       Donor             Population     Source 

 qAG-1       1        3.66    11.0     Khaiyan           BILs           Angaji (2008) 
 qAG-2       2        4.44    14.5     IR64 
 qAG-1-2     1        2.73     2.83    Khao Hlan On      BILs           Angaji et al. (2010) 
 qAG-3-1     3        2.55     2.78    Khao Hlan On 
 qAG-7-2     7        7.12     9.58    Khao Hlan On 
 qAG-9-1     9        3.88     3.26    Khao Hlan On 
 qAG-9-2     9       15.32    20.59    Khao Hlan On 
 qAG2.2      2        2.43     9.79    Nanhi             F2             Baltazar et al. (2014) 
 qAG3        3        2.42    18.21    IR64 
 qAG7        7       13.93    14.06    Nanhi 
 qAG-1       1        3.25    12.1     Kinmaze           RILs           Jiang et al. (2004) 
 qAG-2       2        4.09    15.6     Kinmaze 
 qAG-5a      5        2.9     19.6     DV85 
 qAG-5b      5        2.61    16.6     DV85 
 qAG-7       7        2.74    10.5     Kinmaze 
 qAG-5       5        3.78    15.51    USSR5             F2             Jiang et al. (2006) 
 qAG-11      11       2.97    10.99    USSR5 
 qAG-2       2        3.7      9.3     Ma Zhan (red)     F2:3           Septiningsih et al. (2013) 
 qAG-5       5        5.1     11.8     Ma Zhan (red) 
 qAG-6       6        4.5      1.5     Ma Zhan (red) 
 qAG-7-1     7       16.5     26.7     Ma Zhan (red) 
 qAG-9       9        3.1      1.7     Ma Zhan (red) 
 qAG-12      12       3.5      5.3     Ma Zhan (red) 

10.5% to 19.6% of the shoot lengths. According to the calculated additive effects,  
the positive effect of three QTLs (qAG-1, qAG-2, and qAG-7) was contributed by  
Kinmaze. Meanwhile, AG tolerance conferred by qAG-5a and qAG-5b was improved  
due to the recurrent parent, DV85. 
    Another set of rice lines was evaluated by Jiang et al. in 2006 using USSR5 and  
N22  as  parents.  USSR5  is  a japonica   subspecies  from  the  former  Soviet  Union  
while N22 is an indica type. These were crossed and the generated F  plants were 2 
evaluated for survival under AG and then genotyped using 121 simple sequence  
repeat (SSR) markers. Mapping revealed two QTLs on chromosomes 5 (qAG-5) and  
11  (qAG-11)  contributing  to AG  tolerance.  Both  QTLs  were  contributed  by  the  
USSR5 allele, which accounted for 11.0–15.5% of the coleoptile length variation. 
    Four QTLs were identified by Angaji in 2008 from a cross using Khaiyan, an  
aus-type tolerant variety from Bangladesh, as a donor. Khaiyan was crossed with  
semi-dwarf nonaromatic indica lowland modern rice variety IR64, and the F s were 1 
backcrossed to IR64 to produce 150 BC F  lines. The identified QTLs are qAG-1, 2 2 
qAG-2-2,  qAG-11, and  qAG-12, which explained 12.0–29.2% of the variation in  
survival of the lines, while together these QTLs accounted for a total of 51.4% of  

----------------------- Page 196-----------------------

Crop Establishment in Direct-Seeded Rice: Traits, Physiology, and Genetics                185 

the  phenotypic  variation.  However,  based  on  the  additive  values,  only  the  QTL  
qAG-1 had the allele from Khaiyan, which increased AG tolerance. 
   Another promising donor for AG tolerance is Khao Hlan On, which is a tall aro- 
matic japonica  upland landrace from Myanmar used by Angaji et al. in their study  
in 2010. They crossed Khao Hlan On with IR64 and the F  progenies were back-1 
crossed and selfed to produce 423 BC F  lines. QTL mapping was done using 135 2 2 
SSRs and one InDel marker. Five QTLs accounting for 17.9–33.5% of the variation  
in percentage survival were detected from chromosomes 1 (qAG-1-2), 3 (qAG-3-1),  
7 (qAG-7-2), and 9 (qAG-9-1 and qAG-9-2). Further, from the values of the additive  
effects of the QTLs, it was inferred that AG tolerance was contributed by alleles  
from Khao Hlan On. 
   More recently, in 2013, Septiningsih et al. used 118 SSR markers to assess AG  
tolerance alleles from Ma-Zhan (red), a highly AG-tolerant landrace from China  
with 90% survival (Angaji et al. 2010). Ma Zhan (red) was crossed with IR42 and  
then backcrossed to produce BC F  families. The survival rates and genotype data 2 3 
of 118 SSR markers in 175 families revealed six QTLs related to AG on chromo- 
somes 2, 5, 6, and 7, accounting for 5.6–30.3% of the phenotypic variation. These  
QTLs are qAG-2, qAG-5, qAG-6, qAG-7-1, qAG-7-2, and qAG-7-3. It must also be  
noted that all five of these QTLs were donated by Ma Zhan (red). QTL  qAG-7-2  
explained the highest amount of phenotypic variation, amounting to 30.3% in inter- 
val  mapping  (IM)  and  31.7%  in  composite  interval  mapping  (CIM),  with  LOD  
scores of 13.7 and 14.5, respectively. This QTL was further evaluated to confirm its  
presence and effect. The authors developed introgression lines bearing the homozy- 
gous alleles of qAG-7-2 from Ma Zhan (red) and revealed that these introgression  
lines have significantly higher survival (47.58 ± 4.72%) than the introgression lines  
bearing homozygous IR42 alleles (16.67 ± 2.99%). Moreover, the results confirmed  
the effect of the QTL, which rendered an additional 30% survival in line with the  
homozygous allele of Ma Zhan (red). Given that Ma Zhan (red) still had the highest  
survival rate (73.7 ± 14.19%) among all the lines analyzed, this suggests the effect  
of other QTLs distributed widely in the rice genome to improve AG tolerance. 
   Hsu and Tung (2015) used both GWAS and QTL mapping to detect genomic  
regions related to AG tolerance. A total of 144 RILs from a Nipponbare and IR64  
cross were used in QTL mapping with 35,501 SNPs. The authors identified a peak  
on chromosome 1 using both single marker analysis (SMA) and interval mapping  
based on the linkage map of 355 SNPs filtered after Bonferonni correction with  
α = 0.05. For GWAS, 153 accessions and 36,901 SNPs were used. This revealed  
three genomic regions on chromosome 7 (25.12, 26.92, and 27.72 Mb); however,  
the major QTL on chromosome 1, which was detected in QTL mapping, was not  
identified using GWAS. Since this QTL on chromosome 1 cannot be tagged as a  
rare variant based on haplotype analysis, it was proposed that the haplotype and  
varietal relationships can account for the inconsistency in findings. As mentioned by  
Kang et al. (2008), genetic association studies are confounded by population struc- 
ture and relatedness, which can produce several false positives. However, Brachi  
et al. (2011) noted that overcorrection for these factors can lead to false-negative  
results. 

----------------------- Page 197-----------------------

186                                                                           F. A. Quilloy et al. 

    Remarkably, some of the identified QTLs overlap across different studies. Some  
of these are (1) qAG-2 detected by Jiang et al. (2004) and Septiningsih et al. (2013),  
(2) qAG-7-2 by Angaji et al. (2010) and qAG-7-3 from Septiningsih et al. (2013),  
and (3) qAG-1-2 from Angaji et al. (2010) and chromosome 1 QTL from Hsu and  
Tung (2015). Further assessment should be done to detect whether these QTLs are  
controlled by the same gene(s). 
    At present, two QTLs have been considered of prime importance for AG toler- 
ance, AG1 (qAG-9-2) and AG2 (qAG-7-1) identified from Khao Hlan On and Ma  
Zhan (red), respectively (Miro and Ismail 2013). In 2015, Kretzschmar et al. fine- 
mapped QTL qAG-9-2 to a 50-kb region on chromosome 9. Based on Nipponbare  
as the reference genome, this region encompasses four genes and one transposable  
element. Contrasting this region to a de novo assembled IR64 sequence revealed a  
20.9-kb   deletion   of  AG1   spanning   across   LOC_Os09g20390/Os09g0369400  
(OsTPP7) and a deletion of neighboring loci. Meanwhile, the QTL did not show any  
structural variation against Nipponbare apart from a 4-kb deletion that is also pres- 
ent in IR64. 

4.2      Seed Longevity 

The life cycle of seeds involves fertilization, dormancy, and germination. Bewley  
(1997) defined seed dormancy as “the failure of an intact viable seed to completely  
germinate under favorable conditions.” Associated with dormancy is seed longevity,  
which is the ability of the seed to remain viable after harvesting, and this is usually  
evaluated through seed germination ratio or percentage. 
    Seed longevity varies among different rice varieties as it is governed by both  
genetic and nongenetic factors. Some notable nongenetic factors are ambient envi- 
ronmental conditions during seed development, maturity at seed harvest, mechani- 
cal damage, presence of pathogens, moisture content, and storage conditions after  
harvest  (Copeland  and  McDonald  1995).  Seed  longevity  and  viability  usually  
decrease when exposed to high temperature and moisture (Roberts 1961; McDonald  
1999). Yamauchi and Winn (1996) reported that low seed longevity or seed aging is  
a major issue in the establishment of seeds in anaerobic environments where direct  
seeding is practiced. If seed longevity fails, crop establishment decreases and weed  
pressure proliferates. Both scenarios can dramatically decrease crop yield; hence,  
the importance of varieties tolerant of seed aging. 

4.2.1     Physiology and Molecular Mechanisms Affecting Seed Longevity 

Seeds battle aging through protection and repair. The seed protection mechanism  
involves the development of a glassy cytoplasm, which limits cellular metabolic  
activities and antioxidant production during seed storage to inhibit the buildup of  
oxidized  macromolecules  that  can  diminish  seed  viability.  Conversely,  the  seed  

----------------------- Page 198-----------------------

Crop Establishment in Direct-Seeded Rice: Traits, Physiology, and Genetics                187 

repair  system  exploits  DNA  glycosylases  and  methionine  sulfoxide  reductases,  
which prevent damage accumulation in the DNA, RNA, and/or proteins during seed  
imbibition (Sano et al. 2016). 
   Seed aging is oftentimes linked with the oxidation of nucleic acids, proteins, and  
lipids (Bailly 2004), causing oxidative stress. This can be combated through passive  
mechanisms, such as nonenzymatic reactive oxygen species (ROS)-scavenging sys- 
tems, and active mechanisms, such as enzymatic ROS detoxification (Sano et al.  
2016). In enzymatic responses, seeds rely on antioxidant enzymes such as superox- 
ide dismutase, catalase, glutathione, ascorbate peroxidase, monodehydroascorbate,  
dehydroascorbate, and glutathione reductase (Bailly 2004; Kumar et al. 2015). Petla  
et  al.  (2016)    also  reported    the   role  of   the  repair   enzyme     l-isoaspartyl  
O-methyltransferase, overexpressed in transgenic rice, by restricting ROS accumu- 
lation and by repairing homeostasis-disruptive isopartlyl residues in proteins. 
   Among the nonenzymatic responses, the most important antioxidants are tocoph- 
erols  or  vitamin  E,  which  prevents  nonenzymatic  lipid  peroxidation.  Vitamin  
E-mediated free radical scavenging in rice decreases lipid membrane peroxidation,  
which results in greater seed longevity (Hameed et al. 2014). 
   Goufo and Trindade (2013) enumerated other biochemical factors affecting the  
longevity of rice seeds that include phenolic acid, flavonoids, coumarins, tannins,  
and anthocyanins. For example, antioxidant polyphenols such as flavonoids in the  
seed coat, embryo, and endosperm of Arabidopsis have been shown to increase seed  
longevity (Debeaujon et al.  2000). It is worth noting that AG donor lines such as  
Khao Hlan On have red pericarps, which may have putative roles in both seed lon- 
gevity and AG tolerance. 
   Interest has increased in the epigenetic basis of the seed life cycle from fertiliza- 
tion to dormancy until germination. van Zanten et al. (2013) reported that seeds  
require epigenetic factors such as chromatin condensation to enable the transition  
from seed dormancy to germination in Arabidopsis thaliana . These epigenetic mod- 
ifications  include  condensation  and  methylation  (Exner  and  Hennig  2008;  Xiao  
et al.  2006), which affect chromatin accessibility under stress. Xiao et al. (2006)  
stated that mutated genes for DNA methylation result in nonviable seedlings and  
improperly developed embryo in A. thaliana . Interestingly, using a drought-tolerant  
barley variety, it was found that HvDME gene was highly expressed after 10 days  
of drought stress (Kapazoglou et al. 2013). This gene codes for DNA glycolases,  
which are responsible for DNA methylation affecting chromatin accessibility. 
   Recent work on the environmental effect on seed longevity likewise showed the  
influence of the pretreatments of seed drying at 45–60 °C (Whitehouse et al. 2017).  
It was revealed that this improves seed longevity in rice germplasm prior to storage.  
Furthermore,  environmental  transgenerational  changes  such  as  warmer  parental  
growth  environment  affect  the  subsequent  generation’s  seed  longevity  in  alpine  
trees  (Silene  vulgaris)  by  providing  transcripts  of  SvHSP17.4  and  SvNRPD12  
mRNAs  to  withstand  heat  stress  (Mondoni  et  al.  2014).  Moreover,  the  maternal  
environment of rice might have a putative role in seed longevity as was shown in  
barley (Nagel et al. 2015). 

----------------------- Page 199-----------------------

188                                                                                     F. A. Quilloy et al. 

4.2.2      Genetic Factors Affecting Seed Longevity 

Genome-wide association mapping in barley (Hordeum vulgare) showed that seed  
longevity is inherently affected by genetics, maternal environment, and seed dete- 
rioration while negating the effects of lipid-soluble tocochromanols, oil, and pro- 
teins  (Nagel  et  al.  2015).  Studies  of  different  rice  genotypes  have  shown  that  
indica-type varieties have higher seed longevity than japonica -type (Chang  1991;  
Ellis et al.  1992). Table 3 summarizes some of the QTLs identified from different  
rice populations related to seed longevity. 
    In rice, three QTLs for seed longevity (qLG-2, qLG-4, and qLG-9) were detected  
on  chromosomes  2,  4,  and  9,  respectively,  using  backcross  inbred  lines  from  a  
Nipponbare/Kasalath cross (Miura et al. 2002). QTL qLG-9 accounted for 59.5% of  
the phenotypic variation, which has a larger effect than the phenotypic variation  
effect of qLG-2 with 13.4% and qLG-4 with 11.6%. Further investigation by Sasaki  
et al. (2005) detected 12 germination QTLs as indices of seed longevity. In the latter  
study, qLG-9 was also detected and identified as RC9-2, which affected phenotypic  
variation by 12.5–12.8%. 
    Sasaki  et  al.  (2015)  fine-mapped  the  putative  gene  located  in  qLG-9  using  
advanced backcross progenies from the cross between japonica -type Nipponbare  
and indica-type Kasalath. They found that the candidate genes in the region encode  
for  trehalose-6-phosphatase  (Os09g039369400),  TPP,  and  an  unknown  protein  
(Os09g039369500). Notably, Kretzschmar et al. (2015) mapped a candidate gene in  
the same region, which enhances anaerobic germination. This further affirms that  
the gene for seed longevity can be used for marker-assisted selection (MAS) for the  
breeding of aging tolerant rice for direct-seeded conditions to enable seedling ger- 
mination and establishment even in anaerobic conditions. 

4.3      Early Seedling Vigor  

Seedling vigor reflects the plant’s potential to quickly emerge from the soil or water,  
which is a relevant trait for crop establishment, especially for direct-seeded rice. It  
is associated with germination and seedling growth, which enable good crop estab- 
lishment and weed competition (Diwan et al.  2013). It is a complex trait that is  
governed  by  several  genetic  factors  that  affect  the  physiological,  morphological,  
and biochemical processes of the plant. 

4.3.1      Physiology and Molecular Mechanisms of Early Seedling Vigor 

Some of the physiological traits that affect early seedling vigor are shoot length,  
shoot fresh weight, number of tillers per plant, mesocotyl length, root fresh and dry  
weight, germination rate, germination index, amylase activity, reducing sugar con- 
tent, root activity, and chlorophyll content. Teng et al. ( 1992) evaluated the seedling  

----------------------- Page 200-----------------------

Crop Establishment in Direct-Seeded Rice: Traits, Physiology, and Genetics                        189 

Table 3   Summary of major QTLs for seed longevity-related traits identified from different rice  
populations 
 Trait     QTL           Chr   LOD      R2      Donor                 Population   Reference 

 GECAP     qMT-           7      4.8     11.6   Milyang 23            RILs         Jiang et al.  
           SGC7.1                                                                  (2011) 
           qMT-           1      6.19    10.7   Tong 88-8 
           SGC1.1 
           qMT-           5      5.96    12.5   Milyang 23 
           SGC5.1 
           qMT-           7      6.76    12.5   Milyang 23 
           SGC7.2 
           qMT-           9      5.97    11.8   Milyang 23 
           SGC9.1 
           qDT-           2      7.5     12.4   Dasanbyeo             RILs 
           SGC2.1 
           qDT-           3      5.79    15.6   Dasanbyeo 
           SGC3.1 
           qDT-           9     10.29    20.5   Dasanbyeo 
           SGC9.1 
 GEC       qRC9-2         9      5.3     12.5   Milyang 23            RILs         Sasaki et al.  
           qRC9-1         9      4.4     11.3   Milyang 23                         (2005) 

           qRC9-2         9      5.4     12.8   Milyang 23 
           qSSnj-2-1      2      4.1     12.3   Nanjing35             BILs         Lin et al. (2015) 
 GEP       qSSn-5         5      5.3     15.0   N22 
           qSSn-6         6      4.1     13.6   N22 
           qSSn-9         9      4.3     13.1   N22 
           qSSn-1         1      4.9     11.3   N22 
           qSSn-9         9      6.8     13.7   N22 
           qSSn-1-1       1      4.2      9.9   N22 
           qLG-9          9    13.883    59.5   Kasalath              BILs         Miura et al.  
                                                                                   (2002) 
           qSD-3          3      5.11    14.5   ZYQ8                  DH           Guo et al. (2004) 
 GER       qSS4-1         4      4.99   18.68   Shennong 265          RILs         Dong et al.  
           qSS12-2        12    10.0     44.3   Lijiangxing-                       (2017) 
                                                tuanheigui 
           qSS9-2         2      5.22   29.09   Shennong 265 
           qSS-6          6      6.74   14.45   Kasalath              BILs         Li et al. (2012) 
           qSS-9          9      5.36   10.63   Kasalath 
 SI        qRGR-1         1      6.95   28.63   IR24                  RILs         Xue et al. (2008) 

DH doubled haploids, RILs recombinant inbred lines, BILs backcross-derived inbred lines, GECAP  
germination capability, GEC germination count,  GEP germination percentage,  GER germination  
rate, SI storage index 

----------------------- Page 201-----------------------

190                                                                            F. A. Quilloy et al. 

growth of 38 rice varieties with differences in grain length, width, and weight. They  
revealed  that  the  most  vigorous  seedlings  were  those  with  larger  embryos  and  
heavier endosperms. 
    Within the endosperm, the stored starch granules are composed of both amylose  
and amylopectin. These starch granules were distinguished based on their glucose  
residues (Huang et al. 2017). Amylose is made up of α-1,4-linked glucose residues;  
hence, it can be broken down into maltose by amylases. Amylopectin, however, can- 
not be split due to the presence of both α-1,4 and α-1,6 linkages. Starch hydrolysis  
is an important step for ATP production and for the generation of carbon skeletons  
for the development of new cellular components (Mitsui et al.  1996). Prior to pho- 
toautotrophy, seedlings gain the energy required for plant development from the  
breakdown of starch granules (i.e., amylose) in the endosperm (Cui et al.  2002b).  
This is regulated by starch-hydrolyzing enzymes such as α-amylases, which facili- 
tate the cleavage of α-1,4-glucan bonds of starch (Hakata et al. 2012). Notably, this  
is considered as the first committed step in starch degradation. 
    α-Amylases are known to be initially expressed in the scutellar epithelial tissue  
and in the aleurone layer; they are then subsequently secreted into the starchy endo- 
sperm (Mitsui et al.  1996) to initiate starch breakdown. Therefore, at the seedling  
stage,  plant  vigor  can  be  accounted  for  by  higher  amylose  content  and  amylase  
activity, which provide the growing embryo with enough energy for development.  
Huang  et  al.  (2017)  used  two  cultivars, Yuxiangyouzhan  and  Huanghuazhan,  to  
assess  the  morphophysiological  traits  governing  seedling  vigor. Yuxiangyouzhan  
(96%) showed a higher germination percentage than Huanghuazhan (87%). It was  
further revealed that Yuxiangyouzhan had higher seed amylose content and amylase  
activity. Additionally, Huang et al. (2017) cited the utility of using cultivars with  
thinner hulls, hence requiring less mechanical strength for coleoptile emergence. 

4.3.2     Genetic Factors Affecting Early Seedling Vigor 

Diwan et al. (2013) highlighted the importance of producing genotypes with early  
seedling vigor due to economic and environmental concerns. To address this, it is  
important to determine the genetics underlying seedling vigor. Several studies have  
been conducted to identify QTLs related to early seedling vigor. Table 4 summa- 
rizes some of the major QTLs related to early vigor that have been identified from  
different studies. Anumalla et al. (2015) surmised that RM259 and RM84 of chro- 
mosome 1; RM282, RM148, and RM85 of chromosome 3; RM26 of chromosome  
5; and RM11 of chromosome 7 were the most promising markers for several seed- 
ling vigor traits. Nagavarapu et al. (2017) validated eight of the previously identified  
QTLs from different studies: qGR-1, qGP, and qGI-11 (Wang et al. 2010); RZ448  
and RZ395 (Redoña and Mackill  1996); qFV-3-2, qFV-5-2, and qFV-10 (Zhou et al.  
2007). The authors used 47 genotypes suitable for diverse ecosystems and estimated  
seedling vigor traits, followed by QTL analysis. Among the eight QTLs used for  
validation, six (qGR-1, qFV-10, qFV-3-2, qFV-5-2, qGP-6, and RZ395) were found  
to be associated with some of the selected genotypes. QTL qGR-1 for germination  

----------------------- Page 202-----------------------

Crop Establishment in Direct-Seeded Rice: Traits, Physiology, and Genetics                     191 

Table 4   Summary of major QTLs for early seedling vigor-related traits identified from different  
rice populations 
 Trait     QTL          Chr  LOD    R2    Donor            Population   Reference 

 EUE       qEMM1.1      1    –       43.0 –                BILs         Dixit et al. (2015) 
           qEUE3.1      3     11.3   18.6 Swarna           BILs         Singh et al. (2017) 
           qEUE3.2      3     6.49   11.2 Swarna 
           qEUE4.1      4    7.1     12.2 Swarna 
           qEUE5.1      5     11.0   18.3 Swarna 
           qEUE5.2      5     10.7   12.6 Swarna 
           qEUE6.1      6    7.4     12.5 Swarna 
 EV        qEVV9.1      9    –        5.8 AUS276/3         BILs         Sandhu et al. (2014) 
           qEVV9.1      9    –        6.4 AUS276/3 
           qEV3.1       3     4.13    7.2 Swarna           BILs         Singh et al. (2017) 
           qEV3.2       3    7.7     13.1 Swarna 
           qEV4.1       4    7.6     12.1 Swarna 
           qEV5.1       5    4.2      7.4 Swarna 
           qEV5.2       5    4.2      7.5 Swarna 
           qEV6.1       6    6.0     10.6 Swarna 
 GI        qGI-7        7    4.3     13.9 Daguandao        RILs         Wang et al. (2010) 
           qGI-11       11   5.1     54.9 Daguandao 
 GEP       qGP-4        4    5.7     12.7 IR28 
           qGP-6        6    5.3     24.0 Daguandao 
           qGP-8        8    4.3     12.2 Daguandao 
 GER       qGR3-2       3    5.2      5.8 Zhenshan97       RILs         Cui et al. (2002a) 
           qGR3-3       3    4.3      4.9 Minghui63 
           qGR5-1       5     15.9   17.4 Zhenshan97 
           qGR5-2       5    6.4      8.3 Minghui63 
           qGR6-1       6    5.1      5.6 Zhenshan97 
           qGR6-2       6    4.9      6.3 Zhenshan97 
           qGR3         3     9.69   31.3 Arroz da Terra   BILs         Fukuda et al. (2014) 
           qSV-3-2      3    5.4     14.7 Teqing           RILs         Zhang et al. (2005) 
 GRR       qGR2         2     4.33   10.7 M-203            RILs         Cordero-Lara et al. (2016) 
           qMel-1       1    5.4     15.9 Kasalath         BILs         Lee et al. (2012) 
          qMel-3        3    4.2     11.5 Kasalath 
 RAL      qSV-1         1     11.9   22.6 Minghui63        RILs         Xie et al. (2014) 
          qSV-5c        5     14.8   30.5 Zhenshan97 
          qSV-6a        6     5.33   12.6 Zhenshan97 
          qSV-6b        6     5.63   13.3 Zhenshan97 
 RODW     qRDW5-1       5     19.4   24.1 Zhenshan97       RILs         Cui et al. (2002a) 
          qRDW5-2       5     10.4   13.2 Zhenshan97 
          qRDW10-1      10   5.6      7.3 Zhenshan97 
          qRDW3.1       3    4.8      8.4 Moroberekan      BILs         Singh et al. (2017) 

                                                                                       (continued) 

----------------------- Page 203-----------------------

192                                                                             F. A. Quilloy et al. 

Table 4   (continued) 
 Trait     QTL          Chr  LOD    R2    Donor            Population   Reference 

 ROHD      qRHD8.1      8    –        6.6 AUS276/3         BILs         Sandhu et al. (2014) 
           qRHD5.1      5    –        6.3 AUS276/3 
           qRHD1.1      1    –        6.3 AUS276/3 
 ROHL      qRHL8.1      8    –       25.3 AUS276/3 
           qRHL1.1      1    –        4.1 AUS276/3 
 ROL       qMRL1-1      1    9.8     11.4 Minghui63        RILs         Cui et al. (2002a) 
           qMRL1-2      1    4.1      5.1 Zhenshan97 
           qMRL5-1      5     11.0   13.1 Zhenshan97 
           qMRL6-1      6     12.4   15.0 Zhenshan97 
           QSV-5a       5    5.5     10.9 Teqing           RILs         Zhang et al. (2005) 
           qSV-8-2      8    5.3     10.1 Teqing 
          qSV-6         6    4.9     13.2 Lemont 
 SERUE    qSRUE4.4      4     4.15   14.6 IR26             RILs         Cheng et al. (2013) 
 SEDW     qFV-5-1       5     5.58   11.6 Teqing           RILs         Zhou et al. (2007) 
          qFV-10b       10    4.99    8.0 Teqing 
 SHE      qCL11         11   4.2     14.8 Arroz da Terra   BILs         Fukuda et al. (2014) 
          qSV-5a        5     6.78   12.7 Zhenshan97       RILs         Xie et al. (2014) 
          qSV-5b        5     6.53   14.9 Minghui63 
          qSV-8         8     6.03   13.4 Zhenshan97 
          qSV-11-1      11    13.0   28.8 Minghui63 
          qSV-11-2      11    5.27   13.4 Minghui63 
          qHES8         8     5.64   12.3 M-206            RILs         Cordero-Lara et al. (2016) 
          qHES9         9     4.37   9.38 M-203 
          qHLS10        10    4.99   11.0 M-203 
          qHLS12        12    4.37   9.54 M-206 
          qPHS1         1    5.5      7.2 Dunghan Shali    RILs         Abe et al. (2012) 
          qPHS3-1       3    5.3      6.6 Dunghan Shali 
          qPHS3-2       3     17.5   26.2 Dunghan Shali 
          qPHS4         4    4.4      5.2 Dunghan Shali 
          qCSH2         2    5.2     16.6 Jileng           F2:3         Han et al. (2007) 
           qCSH12       12    4.68   17.9 Jileng 
           qFV-5-2      5     8.76   14.0 Teqing           RILs         Zhou et al. (2007) 
           qFV-10a      10    6.91    9.8 Teqing 
           qSHL5.2      5    5.0      8.8 Swarna           BILs         Singh et al. (2017) 
           QSV-5b       5    4.2      6.3 Teqing           RILs         Zhang et al. (2005) 
           qSV-7        7    5.9     10.7 Lemont 

                                                                                       (continued) 

----------------------- Page 204-----------------------

Crop Establishment in Direct-Seeded Rice: Traits, Physiology, and Genetics                    193 

Table 4   (continued) 
 Trait     QTL         Chr   LOD    R2    Donor           Population   Reference 

 SHDW     qSDW4.2       4    7.06   16.8  IR26            RILs         Cheng et al. (2013) 
          qSDW8.2       8    4.43   14.4  IR26 
          qSDW1-1       1    8.4     9.7  Zhenshan97      RILs         Cui et al. (2002a) 
          qSDW3-1       3    7.2     8.2  Minghui63 
          qSDW5-1       5    7.9     8.6  Zhenshan97 
          qSDW5-2       5    4.7     6.6  Zhenshan97 
          qSDW6-2       6    8.7    10.3  Zhenshan97 
          qSDW9-1       9    5.7     6.2  Minghui63 
          qSV-3-1       3    4.4     6.3  Lemont          RILs         Zhang et al. (2005) 
          qSV-5         5    7.2    12.1  Teqing 
          qSDW3         3    8.24   32.2  Arroz da Terra  BILs         Fukuda et al. (2014) 
 SHFW     qFW1          1    18.4   34.6  M-203           RILs         Cordero-Lara et al. (2016) 
          qFW9          9    4.28    7.2  M-203 
 STL      qSL3.1        3    4.0     7.0  Moroberekan     BILs         Singh et al. (2017) 
          qSL5.2        5    4.9     8.5  Moroberekan 

DH doubled haploids, RILs recombinant inbred lines, BILs backcross-derived inbred lines, EUE  
early uniform emergence,  EV early vigor,  GI germination index,  GEP germination percentage,  
GER germination rate, GRR growth rate, RAL radicle length, RODW root dry weight, ROHD root  
hair density, ROHL root hair length, ROL root length, SERUE seed reserve use efficiency, SEDW  
seedling dry weight, SHE seedling height, SHDW shoot dry weight, SHFW shoot fresh weight, STL  
stem length 

rate was detected in 12 genotypes;  qFV-10 for seedling height under flooding in  
eight  genotypes;  qFV-3-2  for  coleoptile  emergence  under  flooding,  qFV-5-2  for  
seedling height upon water draining, and RZ395 for mesocotyl elongation in three  
genotypes; and qGP-6 for germination percentage in two genotypes. Notably, some  
of the genotypes also showed multiple QTLs such as Dinesh with four and Pooja  
Sabita and Vivekadhan 62 each with two. Furthermore, Abe et al. (2012) identified  
OsGA20ox1 as a candidate gene for seedling vigor in rice. Using RILs from a cross  
between Kekashi and Dinghan Shali, the authors identified a putative QTL on chro- 
mosome 3, qPHS3-2, which affects 26.2% of the phenotypic variation in seedling  
height. This QTL region was then introduced to NILs with a background of an elite  
cultivar, Iwatekko. The region was fine-mapped into an 81-kb interval bearing the  
OsGA20ox1 gene that is related to gibberellin biosynthesis. Their further analysis  
revealed that both Dunghan Shali and the NILs had higher expression of OsGA20ox1  
relative to Iwatekko, which suggests the utility of this gene for seedling vigor. 

----------------------- Page 205-----------------------

194                                                                                                    F. A. Quilloy et al. 

4.4       Breeding Rice with Improved Germination  

Genetic studies on traits such as AG, seed longevity, and early seedling vigor have  
shown  high  genetic  variation  between  modern  rice  varieties,  breeding  lines,  and  
traditionally evolved cultivars. Systematic extraction of genes that confer stronger  
germination from traditional varieties is required to develop high-yielding varieties  
with good crop stand and improved weed competitiveness. With DSR covering a  
larger proportion of rice area and quickly becoming an ask of the future, it is clear  
that rice varieties have to evolve from their current state and reach much higher  
tolerance of adverse conditions during seed germination. Although a large number  
of DSR breeding programs target selection for early vigor, a thorough understand- 
ing of this trait is most important to make genetic gains. For example, it is believed  
that increased seed size allows better germination capacity. However, in the case of  
rice, grain shape is an important seed quality and has to be kept in line with the  
product requirements of specific environments. This limits the amount of improve- 
ment for the trait as the best lines have to be selected within grain shape classes.  
This  may  also  lead  to  higher  popularity  of  varieties  with  larger  grains  under  
DSR. Similarly, grain pericarp color has been associated with higher AG tolerance  
and seed longevity and this needs to be addressed through systematic genetic stud- 
ies to be able to develop white rice with better germination and seed longevity. Trait  
development and breeding methods must be combined systematically to be able to  
leverage the advantage of alleles with major and minor effects. 
     Figure 7 shows a set of pipelines that allow a systematic flow of required traits  
into a breeding program. Since most modern rice varieties are deficient in these  
traits, the work begins in the trait development pipeline with the development of a  

Fig. 7   Breeding program structure for systematically combining exotic traits in a breeding pro- 
gram with minimum linkage drag 

----------------------- Page 206-----------------------

Crop Establishment in Direct-Seeded Rice: Traits, Physiology, and Genetics                      195 

phenotyping  protocol  and  donor  identification.  Once  this  is  complete,  adequate  
mapping  populations  are  to  be  developed  that  can  support  the  identification  of  
robust QTLs. It is also to be kept in mind during this process that the recipient be  
chosen correctly. Ideally, these recipients should have elite genetic backgrounds that  
can be used in a breeding program in the future or those DSR-adapted breeding  
lines  or  varieties  that  are  deficient  in  these  traits.  Upon  the  identification  of  the  
QTLs, screening a part of the mapping population in a few key locations can test  
their effect in the target environments. This allows developing confidence in the  
effect of the QTL and investment in further fine-mapping can be carried out. Fine-  
mapped QTL regions and associated markers are delivered to the trait deployment  
pipeline, which rapidly develops high-yielding NILs of a wide range of recipient  
parents.  Ideally,  these  should  be  the  latest  elite  breeding  lines  from  the  variety  
development pipeline. These NILs are entered into the pipeline and checked for  
yield potential and trait performance across key testing sites. High-performing NILs  
may be advanced for release as well as recycled into the crossing process to develop  
the next generation of breeding lines. This cyclic process allows the rapid recycling  
of high-performing lines as parents and allows building on the achieved genetic gain  
to advance it further. Once released, the varieties developed through this pipeline  
are managed through a seed systems team for adequate placement and deployment  
in collaboration with national seed systems. This team also collects feedback and  
provides it to the above pipeline so that any possible problems can be addressed in  
the next wave of varieties. The improvement of breeding lines for seed germination-  
related traits is important for both inbred programs and hybrid breeding programs.  
Hybrids provide great potential for achieving high yields in direct-seeded environ- 
ments.  However,  for  hybrids  to  be  successful  in  DSR,  germination  and  seedling  
survival must be high, and good crop stand be achieved with low seed rates to keep  
seed costs down. 
    All three major groups of traits discussed previously should be targeted to be  
able to improve germination under direct-seeded conditions. Although anaerobic  
germination is one of the most important traits, it cannot provide the needed robust- 
ness without other traits. Early seedling vigor helps to boost the effect of anaerobic  
germination and leads to better tolerance. Vigorous and rapidly growing coleoptiles  
can emerge from deeper soil layers efficiently and allow more uniform germination.  
This is specifically helpful in cases where seeding is mechanized and field prepara- 
tions are not adequate. Lastly, higher seed longevity helps in maintaining germina- 
tion for relatively older seeds. In cases where farmers use their own seeds, the age  
of seeds normally varies from 6 to 8 months. It is observed that although this dura- 
tion does not affect germination to a large extent, it may have an effect on early  
vigor  and  anaerobic  germination.  In  some  cases  where  seeds  are  not  adequately  
stored, germination may also become affected. It is observed, however, that genetic  
variation exists for the trait and it can be harnessed to improve modern varieties  
similar to the previous group of traits. In general, multiple donor lines for the three  
groups of traits can be crossed to two to three elite recipient lines, each belonging to  
a different grain shape group. This will allow the development of nested association  
mapping populations with a common recipient parent within the grain shape group.  

----------------------- Page 207-----------------------

196                                                                             F. A. Quilloy et al. 

Trait development activities can then be undertaken to identify and fine-map robust  
QTLs for each of the grain shape groups. Finally, the identified QTLs can be intro- 
gressed singly or pyramided into the recipient lines and can be further deployed in  
the breeding program as donor lines. 

5     Conclusions 

Globally, DSR systems are of high importance to sustain profitable rice production  
under  the  current  agricultural  scenario.  Declining  water  and  labor  resources  are  
driving rice away from the traditional transplanted system. DSR systems are profit- 
able and more amenable to mechanization and are able to decrease water and labor  
requirements considerably vis-à-vis transplanted systems. However, rice varieties  
require a specific set of traits at various growth stages to be able to accumulate bio- 
mass and produce yield. In the absence of such varieties, the full potential of direct- 
seeded rice systems cannot be exploited. Further, the use of unsuitable rice varieties  
makes  these  systems  risky  and  vulnerable  to  crop  failure. These  result  in  a  low  
adoption of the technology despite its obvious benefits. Rice varieties containing  
DSR adaptation traits are thus critical to success in these systems. 
    An important phase in DSR systems is crop establishment. Although the use of  
high-yielding varieties is important, this will be futile if crop establishment fails.  
This becomes even more important in the case of hybrid rice, for which adoption  
depends on the minimization of seed rate and good crop establishment. Anaerobic  
germination, seed longevity, and early seedling vigor are some traits relevant to crop  
establishment under direct seeding. Anaerobic germination enables the embryo to  
sprout and the seedling to survive during anoxia, which can occur upon seeding  
when the field is intentionally or accidentally irrigated with water. Seed longevity  
renders aging tolerance to seeds, such that the seeds remain viable under tempera- 
ture or moisture changes for a longer period. Lastly, early seedling vigor enables the  
growing  seedlings  to  quickly  emerge  from  the  soil  and/or  water  and  gives  them  
strong early crop establishment and weed competition. 
    The physiology and genetics of the aforementioned traits have been studied in  
the past; however, a lot remains to be unraveled to fully exploit these traits. Further,  
there  remains  a  need  to  use  these  traits  in  breeding  programs  to  develop  DSR-  
specific varieties. This requires well-designed trait development, pre-breeding, and  
breeding pipelines with set criteria to advance only the most robust of products. The  
success of rice in DSR systems largely depends on the robustness of rice varieties at  
early stages to avoid the risk of crop failure and weed competition. Developing rice  
varieties with stronger germination capacity under varying conditions is one of the  
most important factors that will determine success in this area. 

----------------------- Page 208-----------------------

Crop Establishment in Direct-Seeded Rice: Traits, Physiology, and Genetics                          197 

References 

Abe A, Takagi H, Fujibe T, Aya K, Kojima M, Sakakibara H et al (2012) OsGA20ox1, a candidate  
    gene for a major QTL controlling seedling vigor in rice. Theor Appl Genet 125:647–657 
Adachi Y,  Sugiyama  M,  Sakagami  JI,  Fukuda A,  Ohe  M, Watanabe  H  (2015)  Seed  germina- 
    tion and coleoptile growth of new rice lines adapted to hypoxic conditions. Plant Prod Sci  
    18:471–475 
Aggarwal PK (2008) Global climate change and Indian agriculture: impacts, adaptation and miti- 
    gation. Indian J Agric Sci 78(11):911 
Aggarwal PK, Kumar SN, Pathak H (2010) Impacts of climate change on growth and yield of rice  
    and wheat in the Upper Ganga Basin. WWF report. WWF, New Delhi, pp 1–44 
Akhgari H, Kaviani B (2011) Assessment of direct seeded and transplanting methods of rice culti- 
    vars in the northern part of Iran. Afr J Agric Res 6(31):6492–6498 
Alpi A, Beevers H (1983) Effects of O2 concentration on rice seedlings. Plant Physiol 71(1):30–34 
Angaji  S  (2008)  Mapping  QTLs  for  submergence  tolerance  during  germination  in  rice. Afr  J  
    Biotechnol 7(15):2551–2558 
Angaji S, Septiningsih EM, Mackill D, Ismail AM (2010) QTLs associated with tolerance of flood- 
    ing during germination in rice (Oryza sativa L.). Euphytica 172:159–168 
Anumalla M, Anandan A, Pradhan S (2015) Early seedling vigour, an imperative trait for direct-  
    seeded rice: an overview on physio-morphological parameters and molecular markers. Planta  
    241(5):1027–1050 
Azhiri-Sigari T, Gines H, Sebastian LS, Wade L (2005) Seedling vigor of rice cultivars in response  
    to seedling depth and soil moisture. Philipp J Crop Sci 30:53–58 
Bailly C (2004) Active oxygen species and antioxidants in seed biology. Seed Sci Res 14:93–107 
Baltazar M, Ignacio J, Thompson M, Ismail A, Mendioro M, Septiningsih E (2014) QTL mapping  
    for tolerance to anaerobic germination from IR64 and the aus landrace Nanhi using SNP geno- 
    typing. Euphytica 197(2):251–260 
Barker T (2009) Climate change and EU labor markets. Employment in Europe 2009. EU, Brussels 
Barker R, Dawe D, Tuong T, Bhuiyan S, Guerra L (1998) The outlook for water resources in the  
    year 2020: challenges for research on water management in rice production. In: Assessment  
    and Orientation Towards the 21st Century. Proceedings of 19th Session of the International  
    Rice Commission, Cairo, Egypt, 7–9 September 1998. FAO, Rome, pp 96–109 
Bewley JD (1997) Seed dormancy and germination. Plant Cell 9:1055–1066 
Bouman B, Lampayan R, Tuong T (2007) Water management in irrigated rice: coping with water  
    scarcity. International Rice Research Institute, Los Baños 
Brachi B, Morris GP, Borevitz JO (2011) Genome-wide association studies in plants: the missing  
    heritability is in the field. Genome Biol 12:232 
Chang TT (1991) Findings from a 28-year seed viability experiment. Int Rice Res Newsl 16:5–6 
Chavarria    G,    dos    Santos    HP    (2012)    Plant    water    relations:  absorption,    trans- 
    port   and    control   mechanisms.      In:   Monanaro     G    (ed)   Advances      in   selected  
    plant   physiology     aspects.    InTech,    Rijeka.    ISBN:     978-953-51-0557-2,       https:// 
    www.intechopen.com/books/advances-  in-  selected- plantphysiology-  aspects/ 
    plant- water- relations- absorption- transport- and- control- mechanisms 
Cheng X, Cheng J, Huang X, Lai Y, Wang L, Du W (2013) Dynamic quantitative trait loci analysis  
    of seed reserve utilization during three germination stages in rice. PLoS One 8:e80002 
Copeland LO, McDonald MB (1995) Seed science and technology, 3rd edn. Chapman and Hall,  
    London, pp 181–220 
Cordero-Lara KI, Kim H, Tai TH (2016) Identification of seedling vigor-associated quantitative  
    trait loci in temperate japonica rice. Plant Breed Biotechnol 4:426–440 
Cui K, Peng S, Xing Y, Xu C, Yu S, Zhang Q (2002a) Molecular dissection of seedling-vigor and  
    associated physiological traits in rice. Theor Appl Genet 105:745–753 
Cui K, Peng S, Xing Y, Yu S, Xu C (2002b) Molecular dissection of relationship between seedling  
    characteristics and seed size in rice. Acta Bot Sin 44(6):702–707 

----------------------- Page 209-----------------------

198                                                                                 F. A. Quilloy et al. 

Debeaujon I, Léon-Kloosterziel KM, Koornneef M (2000) Influence of the testa on seed dormancy,  
    germination, and longevity in Arabidopsis . Plant Physiol 122(2):403–414 
Diwan J, Channbyregowda M, Shenoy V, Salimath P, Bhat R (2013) Molecular mapping of early  
    vigour related QTLs in rice. Res J Biol 1:24–30 
Dixit S, Grondin A, Lee CR, Henry A, Olds TM, Kumar A (2015) Understanding rice adaptation  
    to varying agro-ecosystems: trait interactions and quantitative trait loci. BMC Genet 16:86 
Dixit S, Kumar A, Woldring H (2016) Water scarcity in rice cultivation: current scenario, pos- 
    sible solutions, and likely impact. In: Regional: development and dissemination of climate-  
    resilient rice varieties for water-short areas of South Asia and Southeast Asia. International  
    Rice Research Institute, Los Baños, pp 3–26 
Dong XY, Fan SX, Liu J, Wang Q, Li MR, Jiang X, Liu ZY, Yin YC, Wang JY (2017) Identification  
    of QTLs for seed storability in rice under natural aging conditions using two RILs with the  
    same parent Shennong 265. J Integr Agric 16(5):1084–1092 
El-Hendawy S, Sone C, Ito O, Sakagami J (2011) Evaluation of germination ability in rice seeds  
    under anaerobic conditions by cluster analysis. Res J Seed Sci 4(2):82–93 
Ella ES, Setter TL (1999) Importance of seed carbohydrates in rice seedling establishment under  
    anoxia. Acta Hortic 504:209–216 
Elliott J, Deryng D, Müller C, Frieler K, Konzmann M, Gerten D et al (2014) Constraints and  
    potentials  of  future  irrigation  water  availability  on  agricultural  production  under  climate  
    change. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 111(9):3239–3244 
Ellis RH, Hong TD, Roberts EH (1992) The low-moisture-content limit to the negative logarith- 
    mic relation between seed longevity and moisture content in three subspecies of rice. Ann Bot  
    69(1):53–58 
Exner  V,  Hennig  L  (2008)  Chromatin  rearrangements  in  development.  Curr  Opin  Plant  Biol  
    11(1):64–69 
Fanish SA (2016) Enhancing resource use efficiency (RUE) under direct seeded rice (DSR) sys- 
    tem: a review. Am Eurasian J Agric Environ Sci 16(9):1534–1544 
FAO (2016) AQUASTAT main database. Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations  
    (FAO), Rome. http://www.fao.org/nr/water/aquastat/data/query/index.html?lang=eng 
Fukuda A, Kataoka K, Shiratsuchi H, Fukushima A, Yamaguchi H, Mochida H et al (2014) QTLs  
    for seedling growth of direct seeded rice under submerged and low temperature conditions.  
    Plant Prod Sci 17(1):41–46 
Goufo P, Trindade H (2013) Rice antioxidants: phenolic acids, flavonoids, anthocyanins, proan- 
    thocyanidins, tocopherols, tocotrienols, c-oryzanol, and phytic acid. Food Sci Nutr 2:75–104 
Grigg DE (1974) The agricultural systems of the world: an evolutionary approach. Cambridge  
    University Press, Cambridge 
Guo L, Zhu L, Xu Y, Zeng D, Wu P, Qian Q (2004) QTL analysis of seed dormancy in rice (Oryza  
    sativa L.). Euphytica 140:155–162 
Hakata M, Kuroda M, Miyashita T, Yamaguchi T, Kojima M, Sakakibara H et al (2012) Suppression  
    of alpha-amylase genes improves quality of rice grain ripened under high temperature. Plant  
    Biotechnol J 10(9):1110–1117 
Hameed A, Rasheed A, Gul B, Khan MA (2014) Salinity inhibits seed germination of perennial  
    halophytes Limonium stocksii and  Suaeda fruticosa by reducing water uptake and ascorbate  
    dependent antioxidant system. Environ Exp Bot 107:32–38 
Han L, Qiao Y, Zhang S, Zhang Y, Cao G, Kim J, Lee K, Koh H (2007) Identification of quantita- 
    tive trail loci for cold response of seedling vigor traits in rice. J Genet Genom 34(3):239–246 
Ho V, Tran A, Cardarelli F, Perata P, Pucciariello C (2017) A calcineurin B-like protein participates  
    in low oxygen signalling in rice. Funct Plant Biol 44(9):917–928 
Hsu SK, Tung CW (2015) Genetic mapping of anaerobic germination-associated QTLs controlling  
    coleoptile elongation in rice. Rice (N Y) 8(1):1–12 
Hsu SK, Tung CW (2017) RNA-Seq analysis of diverse rice genotypes to identify the genes con- 
    trolling coleoptile growth during submerged germination. Front Plant Sci 8:1–15 

----------------------- Page 210-----------------------

Crop Establishment in Direct-Seeded Rice: Traits, Physiology, and Genetics                             199 

Huang  M,  Zhang  R,  Chen  J,  Cao  F,  Jiang  L,  Zou Y  (2017)  Morphological  and  physiological  
    traits of seeds and seedlings in two rice cultivars with contrasting early vigor. Plant Prod Sci  
    20(1):95–101 
Hwang YS, Thomas B, Rodriguez R (1999) Differential expression of rice α-amylase genes during  
    seedling development under anoxia. Plant Mol Biol 40:911–920 
Illangakoon T, Ella E, Ismail A, Marambe B, Keerthisena R, Bentota A et al (2016) Impact of  
    variety and seed priming on anaerobic germination-tolerance of rice (Oryza sativa L.) varieties  
    in Sri Lanka. Trop Agric Res 28(1):26–37 
IPCC (2007) Climate change 2007: mitigation. In: Metz B, Davidson OR, Bosch PR, Dave R,  
    Meyer  LA  (eds)  Working  Group  III  contribution  to  the  Fourth  Assessment  Report  of  the  
    Intergovernmental  Panel  on  Climate  Change  (IPCC).  Technical  summary.  IPCC,  Geneva.  
    Chapters 3 (Issues related to mitigation in the long term context) and 11 (Mitigation from a  
    cross sectoral perspective) 
Ismail AM, Ella ES, Vergara GV, Mackill DJ (2009) Mechanisms associated with tolerance to  
    flooding  during  germination  and  early  seedling  growth  in  rice  (Oryza  sativa).  Ann  Bot  
    103(2):197–209 
Ismail AM, Johnson DE, Ella ES, Vergara GV, Baltazar AM (2012) Adaptation to flooding during  
    emergence and seedling growth in rice and weeds, and implications for crop establishment.  
    AoB Plants 2012:1–18 
Jiang L, Hou MY, Wang CM, Wan JM (2004) Quantitative trail loci and epistatic analysis of seed  
    anoxia germinability in rice (Oryza sativa). Rice Sci 11(5–6):238–244 
Jiang  L,  Liu  S,  Hou  M, Tang  J,  Chen  L,  Zhai  H  et  al  (2006) Analysis  of  QTLs  for  seed  low  
    temperature germinability and anoxia germinability in rice (Oryza sativa L.). Field Crop Res  
    98(1):68–75 
Jiang W, Lee J, Jin YM, Qiao Y, Piao R, Jang SM, Woo MO, Kwon SW, Liu X, Pan HY, Du X, Koh  
    HJ (2011) Identification of QTLs for seed germination capability after various storage periods  
    using two RIL populations in rice. Mol Cell 31:385–392 
Juang  J, Takano T, Akita  S  (2000)  Expression  of  α-expansin  genes  in  young  seedlings  of  rice  
    (Oryza sativa L.). Planta 211(4):467–473 
Kang HM, Zaitlen NA, Wade CM, Kirby A, Heckerman D, Daly MJ, Eskin E (2008) Efficient con- 
    trol of population structure in model organism association mapping. Genetics 178:1709–1723 
Kapazoglou A, Drosou V, Argiriou A, Tsaftaris AS (2013) The study of a barley epigenetic regula- 
    tor, HvDME, in seed development and under drought. BMC Plant Biol 13:172 
Kaur J, Singh A (2017) Direct seeded rice: prospects, problems/constraints and researchable issues  
    in India. Curr Agric Res J 5(1):13–32 
Kennedy RA, Barrett SC, Vander Zee D, Rumpho ME (1980) Germination and seedling growth  
    under  anaerobic  conditions  in  Echinochloa  crus-galli  (barnyard  grass).  Plant  Cell  Environ  
    3:243–248 
Kordan HA (1974) Patterns of shoot and root growth in rice seedlings germinating under water. J  
    Appl Ecol 1(2):685–690 
Kreft S, Eckstein D, Melchior I (2016) Global climate risk index 2017: who suffers most from  
    extreme weather events? Weather-related loss events in 2015 and 1996 to 2015. Germanwatch  
    Nord-Süd Initiative eV, Bonn 
Kretzschmar T, Pelayo MF, Trijatmiko KR, Gabunada LM, Alam R, Jimenez R et al (2015) A  
    trehalose- 6-phosphate  phosphatase  enhances  anaerobic  germination  tolerance  in  rice.  Nat  
    Plants 1(9):1–5 
Kudahettige N, Pucciariello C, Parlanti S, Alpi A, Perata P (2010) Regulatory interplay of the  
    Sub1A and CIPK15 pathways in the regulation of α-amylase production in flooded rice plants.  
    Plant Biol 13(4):611–619 
Kumar V, Ladha J (2011) Direct seeding of rice: recent developments and future research needs.  
    Adv Agron 111:297–413 
Kumar SJ, Prasad SR, Banerjee R, Thammineni C (2015) Seed birth to death: dual functions of  
    reactive oxygen species in seed physiology. Ann Bot 116:663–668 

----------------------- Page 211-----------------------

200                                                                                F. A. Quilloy et al. 

Lasanthi-Kudahettige  R,  Magneschi  L,  Loreti  E,  Gonzali  S,  Licausi  F,  Novi  G  et  al  (2007)  
    Transcript profiling of the anoxic rice coleoptile. Plant Physiol 144(1):218–231 
Lee HS, Sasaki K, Atsushi H, Ahn SN, Sato T (2012) Mapping and characterization of quantitative  
    trait loci for mesocotyl elongation in rice (Oryza sativa L.). Rice 5(1):13 
Li L, Lin Q, Liu S, Liu X, Wang W, Hang NT, Liu F, Zhao Z, Jiang L, Wan J (2012) Identification  
    of quantitative trait loci for seed storability in rice (Oryza sativa L.). Plant Breed 131:739–743 
Lin Q, Wang W, Ren Y, Jiang Y, Sun A, Qian Y, Zhang Y, He N, Hang NT, Liu Z, Li L, Liu L, Jiang  
    L, Wan J (2015) Genetic dissection of seed storability using two different populations with a  
    same parent rice cultivar N22. Breed Sci 65:411–419 
Lu CA, Lim EK, Yu SM (1998) Sugar response sequence in the promoter of a rice α-amylase gene  
    serves as a transcriptional enhancer. J Biol Chem 273:10120–10131 
Lu CA, Lin CC, Lee KW, Chen JL, Huang LF, Ho SL et al (2007) The SnRK1A protein kinase  
    plays a key role in sugar signaling during germination and seedling growth of rice. Plant Cell  
    19(8):2484–2499 
Magneschi L, Perata P (2009) Rice germination and seedling growth in the absence of oxygen.  
    Ann Bot 103(2):181–196 
McDonald MB (1999) Seed deterioration: physiology, repair and assessment. Seed Sci Technol  
    27:177–237 
McQueen-Mason SJ, Cosgrove DJ (1995) Expansin mode of action on cell walls. Plant Physiol  
    107:87–100 
Mekonnen MM, Hoekstra AY (2016) Four billion people facing severe water scarcity. Sci Adv  
    2(2):e1500323 
Miro B, Ismail AM (2013) Tolerance of anaerobic conditions caused by flooding during germina- 
    tion and early growth in rice (Oryza sativa L.). Front Plant Sci 4:1–18 
Mitsui  T,  Yamaguchi  J,  Akazawa  T  (1996)  Physicochemical  and  serological  characterization  
    of  alpha-amylase  isoforms  and  identification  of  their  corresponding  genes.  Plant  Physiol  
    110(4):1395–1404 
Miura K, Lin SY, Yano M, Nagamine T (2002) Mapping quantitative trait loci controlling seed  
    longevity in rice (Oryza sativa L.). Theor Appl Genet 104:981–986 
Molden D (2007) Water for food, water for life: a comprehensive assessment of water management  
    in agriculture. International Water Management Institute, London 
Mondoni  A,  Orsenigo  S,  Donà  M,  Balestrazzi  A,  Probert  RJ,  Hay  FR,  Abeli  T  (2014)  
    Environmentally induced transgenerational changes in seed longevity: maternal and genetic  
    influence. Ann Bot 113(7):1257–1263 
Nagavarapu T, Keshavulu K, Subba Rao LV, Sengguttuvel P, Maganti SM (2017) Validation of  
    seedling vigour QTLs in rice (Oryza sativa L.). Curr Trends Biotechnol Pharm 11(1):24–33 
Nagel M, Kranner I, Neumann K, Rolletschek H, Seal CE, Colville L, Fernández-Marín B, Börner  
    A (2015) Genome-wide association mapping and biochemical markers reveal that seed ageing  
    and longevity are intricately affected by genetic background and developmental and environ- 
    mental conditions in barley. Plant Cell Environ 38(6):1011–1022 
OCHA (2010) Water scarcity and humanitarian action: key emerging trends and challenges. In:  
    Policy  Development  and  Studies  Branch.  Occasional  policy  briefing  series  No.  4.  OCHA,  
    New York, NY. 15 p 
Pal LR, Yu CH, Mount S, Moult J (2015) Insights from GWAS: emerging landscape of mecha- 
    nisms underlying complex trait disease. BMC Genomics 16(8):1–15 
Pathak H, Sankhyan S, Dubey D, Bhatia A, Jain N (2013) Dry direct-seeding of rice for miti- 
    gating greenhouse gas emission: field experimentation and simulation. Paddy Water Environ  
    11:593–601 
Perata P, Pozueta-Romero J, Akazawa T, Yamaguchi J (1992) Effects of anoxia on starch break- 
    down in rice and wheat seeds. Planta 188:611–618 
Perata P, Geshi N, Yamaguchi J, Akazawa T (1993) Effect of anoxia on the induction of α-amylase  
    in cereal seeds. Planta 191:402–408 

----------------------- Page 212-----------------------

Crop Establishment in Direct-Seeded Rice: Traits, Physiology, and Genetics                           201 

Petla BP, Kamble NU, Kumar M, Verma P, Ghosh S, Singh A, Rao V, Salvi P, Kaur H, Saxena  
    SC, Majee M (2016) Rice protein L-isoaspartyl O-methyltransferase isoforms differentially  
    accumulate during seed maturation to restrict deleterious isoAsp and reactive oxygen species  
    accumulation and are implicated in seed vigor and longevity. New Phytol 211(2):627–645 
Pingali PL (2012) Green revolution: impacts, limits, and the path ahead. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S  
    A 109(31):12302–12308 
Redoña E, Mackill D (1996) Mapping quantitative trait loci for seedling vigor in rice using RFLPs.  
    Theor Appl Genet 92:395–402 
Rice   Knowledge   Bank   (2017)   How   to   manage   water.   http://www.knowledgebank.irri.org/ 
    step- by- step- production/growth/water- management 
Roberts EH (1961) The viability of rice seed in relation to temperature, moisture content, and  
    gaseous environment. Ann Bot 25(3):381–390 
Sadiq I, Fanucchi F, Paparelli E, Alpi E, Bachi A, Alpi A et al (2011) Proteomic indentification of  
    differentially expressed proteins in the anoxic rice coleoptile. J Plant Physiol 168:2234–2243 
Saika H, Matsumura H, Takano T, Tsutsumi N, Nakazono M (2006) A point mutation of Adh1  
    gene is involved in the repression of coleoptile elongation under submergence in rice. Breed  
    Sci 56:69–74 
Sandhu N, Torres RO, Sta Cruz MT, Maturan PC, Jain R, Kumar A, Henry A (2014) Traits and  
    QTLs for development of dry direct-seeded rainfed rice varieties. Exp Bot 66(1):225–244 
Sano N, Rajjou L, North HM, Debeaujon I, Marion-Poll A, Seo M (2016) Staying alive: molecular  
    aspects of seed longevity. Plant Cell Physiol 57(4):660–674 
Sasaki K, Fukuta Y, Sato T (2005) Mapping of quantitative trait loci controlling seed longevity of  
    rice (Oryza sativa L.) after various periods of seed storage. Plant Breed 124:361–366 
Sasaki K, Takeuchi Y, Miura K, Yamaguchi T, Ando T, Ebitani A, Higashitani T, Yamaya A, Yano  
    M, Sato T (2015) Fine mapping of a major quantitative trait locus, qLG-9, that controls seed  
    longevity in rice (Oryza sativa L.). Theor Appl Genet 128(4):769–778 
Sehgal  D,  Singh  R,  Rajpal  V  (2016)  Quantitative  trait  loci  mapping  in  plants:  concepts  and  
    approaches. In: Rajpal VR, Rao SR, Raina SN (eds) Molecular breeding for sustainable crop  
    improvement. Springer International Publishing, Cham, pp 31–59 
Septiningsih EM, Ignacio JI, Sendon PM, Sanchez DL, Ismail AM, Mackill DJ (2013) QTL map- 
    ping and confirmation for tolerance of anaerobic conditions during germination derived from  
    the rice landrace Ma-Zhan Red. Theor Appl Genet 126:1357–1366 
Shingaki-Wells RN, Huang S, Taylor NL, Carroll AJ, Zhou W, Millar A (2011) Differential molec- 
    ular responses of rice and wheat coleoptiles to anoxia reveal novel metabolic adaptations in  
    amino acid metabolism for tissue tolerance. Plant Physiol 156:1706–1724 
Singh UM, Yadav S, Dixit S, Ramayya P, Devi M, Raman K et al (2017) QTL hotspots for early  
    vigor and related traits under dry direct-seeded system in rice (Oryza sativa L.). Front Plant  
    Sci 8:286 
Takahashi H, Saika H, Matsumura H, Nagamura Y, Tsutsumi N, Nishizawa NK et al (2011) Cell  
    division and cell elongation in the coleoptile of rice alcohol dehydrogenase 1-deficient mutant  
    are reduced under complete submergence. Ann Bot 108(2):253–261 
Teng S, Vergara BS, Alejar AA (1992) Relationship of grain length, width, and weight to seedling  
    vigor in rice (Oryza sativa L.). Philipp J Crop Sci 17(1):17–20 
Terashima M, Hosono M, Katoh S (1997) Functional roles of protein domains on rice α-amylase  
    activity. Appl Microbiol Biotechnol 47(4):364–367 
Waffenschmidt  S,  Woessner  JP,  Beer  K,  Goodenough  UW  (1993)  Isodityrosine  cross-linking  
    mediates insolubilization of cell walls in Chlamydomonas. Plant Cell 5(7):809–820 
Wang Z, Wang J, Bao Y, Wang F, Zhang H (2010) Quantitative trait loci analysis for rice seed vigor  
    during the germination stage. J Zhejiang Univ Sci B (Biomed and Biotechnol) 11:958–964 
Whitehouse KJ, Hay FR, Ellis RH (2017) High-temperature stress during drying improves subse- 
    quent rice (Oryza sativa L.) seed longevity. Seed Sci Res 27(4):281–291 
Xiao W,  Custard  KD,  Brown  RC,  Lemmon  BE,  Harada  JJ,  Goldberg  RB,  Fischer  RL  (2006)  
    DNA  methylation  is  critical  for  Arabidopsis  embryogenesis  and  seed  viability.  Plant  Cell  
    18(4):805–814 

----------------------- Page 213-----------------------

202                                                                                F. A. Quilloy et al. 

Xie L, Tan Z, Zhou Y, Xu R, Feng L, Xing Y et al (2014) Identification and fine mapping of quan- 
    titative trait loci for seed vigor in germination and seedling establishment in rice. J Integr Plant  
    Biol 56(8):749–759 
Xue Y,  Zhang  SQ, Yao  QH,  Peng  RH,  Xiong AS,  Li  X,  Zhu  WM,  Zhu YY,  Zha  DS  (2008)  
    Identification of quantitative trait loci for seed storability in rice (Oryza sativa L.). Euphytica  
    164:739–744 
Yamauchi M (1996) Development of anaerobic direct-seeding technology for rice in the tropics.  
    Crop research in Asia: achievements and perspectives. In: Proceedings of the 2nd Asian Crop  
    Science Conference, Fukui, Japan, pp 198–203 
Yamauchi M, Winn T (1996) Rice seed vigor and seedling establishment in anaerobic soil. Crop  
    Sci 36(3):680–686 
van Zanten M, Liu Y, Soppe WJ (2013) Epigenetic signalling during the life of seeds. In: Epigenetic  
    memory and control in plants. Springer, Berlin, pp 127–153 
Zhang Z, Su L, Li W, Chen W, Zhu Y (2005) A major QTL conferring cold tolerance at the early  
    seedling stage using recombinant inbred lines of rice (Oryza sativa L.). Plant Sci 168:527–534 
Zhou L, Wang J-K, Yi Q, Wang Y-Z, Zhu Y-G, Zhang Z-H (2007) Quantitative trait loci for seed- 
    ling vigor in rice under field conditions. Field Crop Res 100(2–3):294–301 

Open Access   This chapter is licensed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution 4.0  
International License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/), which permits use, sharing,  
adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give appropriate  
credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons license and  
indicate if changes were made. 
    The images or other third party material in this chapter are included in the chapter’s Creative  
Commons license, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not  
included in the chapter’s Creative Commons license and your intended use is not permitted by  
statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from  
the copyright holder. 

----------------------- Page 214-----------------------

Genetics and Breeding of Heat Tolerance  
in Rice 

Changrong Ye, Xiaolin Li, Edilberto Redoña, Tsutomu Ishimaru,  
and Krishna Jagadish 

Abstract  Extreme weather events, especially heat waves, have become more fre- 
quent with global warming. High temperature significantly affects world food secu- 
rity by decreasing crop yield. Rice is intensively planted in tropical and subtropical  
areas  in Asia,  where  high  temperature  has  become  a  major  factor  affecting  rice  
production. Rice is sensitive to high temperature, especially at booting and flower- 
ing stages. Rice varieties tolerant of high temperature are rare, and only a few heat-  
tolerant  rice  varieties  have  been  identified.  High  temperature  at  booting  and  
flowering stages causes sterile pollen, decreased pollen shedding, and poor pollen  
germination, which finally lead to a yield decrease. Heat-tolerant QTLs have been  
identified in different studies, but new breeding lines with considerable heat toler- 
ance have not been bred using identified heat-tolerance donors and QTLs. Research  
on heat-tolerant donor identification, QTL mapping, gene cloning, and large-scale  
phenotyping technology is important for developing heat-tolerant rice varieties. 

Keywords  Rice · Heat tolerance · Global warming · High temperature 

C. Ye (*)  
Center for Molecular Breeding Technology Invention and Development, Huazhi  
Biotechnology Co. Ltd., Changsha, Hunan, China 
e-mail: changrong.ye@higentec.com  

X. Li  
Institute of Food Crops, Yunnan Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Kunming, Yunnan, China  

E. Redoña  
Delta Research and Extension Center, Mississippi State University, Stoneville, MS, USA 
e-mail: edredona@drec.msstate.edu  

T. Ishimaru  
Hokuriku Research Station, Central Region Agricultural Research Center, National  
Agriculture and Food Research Organization, Niigata, Japan 
e-mail: cropman@affrc.go.jp  

K. Jagadish  
Department of Agronomy, Kansas State University, Manhattan, KS, USA 
e-mail: kjagadish@ksu.edu 

© The Author(s) 2021                                                                           203 
J. Ali, S. H. Wani (eds.), Rice Improvement,  
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-66530-2_7 

----------------------- Page 215-----------------------

204                                                                                   C. Ye et al. 

Global temperature has been increasing rapidly since the last century, and high tem- 
perature has become a major factor affecting agricultural production. Rice is one of  
the crops most affected by high temperature. Heat tolerance of rice has been studied  
since the 1970s, but the progress attained has been quite slow. Evaluation of rice  
heat tolerance at different growth stages revealed that flowering stage is the most  
sensitive  stage,  and  booting  stage  is  the  second  most  sensitive  stage  (Yang  and  
Heilman  1993; Yoshida et al. 1981). Thus, recent findings and future prospects on  
heat tolerance of rice at these reproductive stages are the main focus in this review. 

1     Climate Change and Global Warming 

Climate  change  is  the  long-term  change  in  weather  patterns.  Climate  change  is  
caused by factors such as biotic processes, variations in solar radiation received by  
Earth, plate tectonics, and volcanic eruptions. Certain human activities have been  
identified as primary causes of ongoing climate change, often referred to as global  
warming (Pachauri and Reisinger 2007). 
    Global warming is the long-term rise in the average temperature of Earth’s cli- 
mate system. Climate proxies show that the temperature had been relatively stable  
over 1000 or 2000 years before 1850. From 1880 to 2012, the global average (land  
and ocean) surface temperature increased by 0.85 (0.65–1.06) °C. From 1906 to  
2005, Earth’s average surface temperature rose by 0.74 ± 0.18 °C (Solomon et al.  
2007).  Since  the  early  twentieth  century,  Earth’s  mean  surface  temperature  has  
increased by 0.8 °C, with 0.6 °C of this hike occurring since 1980 (Jansen et al.  
2007).  Human  influence  has  been  the  dominant  cause  of  the  observed  warming  
since the mid-twentieth century (IPCC 2013). The largest human influence has been  
the  emission  of  greenhouse  gases  (GHG)  such  as  carbon  dioxide,  methane,  and  
nitrous oxide. The greenhouse effect is the process by which absorption and emis- 
sion of infrared radiation by gases in a planet’s atmosphere warm its lower atmo- 
sphere and surface. Global mean surface temperatures for 2081–2100, relative to  
1986–2005, are likely to increase by 0.3–1.7 °C for the lowest and by 2.6–4.8 °C for  
the highest GHG emission scenarios (IPCC 2013). 
    Global warming caused by human activities has become a major constraint for  
agricultural development and crop production. Studies have shown that the annual  
mean maximum and minimum temperatures increased by 0.35 and 1.13 °C for the  
period   1979–2003   at   the   International   Rice   Research   Institute,   Los   Baños,  
Philippines (Peng et al. 2004). By 2080, most cropping areas in the world are likely  
to  be  exposed  to  record  average  air  temperature  (Battisti  and  Naylor  2009).  
Relatively small changes in mean temperature can result in disproportionately large  
changes in the frequency of extreme events (Rosenzweig et al. 2001). These extreme  
temperature events are likely to become more frequent with global warming (Tabaldi  
et al. 2006). Of the 13 warmest years since 1880, 11 occurred from 2001 to 2011  
(i.e., every year starting with 2001), while 2011 was the warmest La Niña year in  
the period from 1950 to 2011 (NOAA 2011). 

----------------------- Page 216-----------------------

Genetics and Breeding of Heat Tolerance in Rice                                           205 

   Future climate change and associated impacts will differ from region to region.  
Anticipated effects include increasing global temperature, rising sea level, changing  
precipitation, and expansion of deserts in the subtropics (IPCC 2014). Other likely  
changes involve more frequent extreme weather events such as heat waves, droughts,  
heavy rainfall with floods, heavy snowfall, ocean acidification, and species extinc- 
tions due to shifting temperature regimes. Effects significant to human beings are  
the threat to food security from decreasing crop yields (Battisti and Naylor 2009). 

2     Rice Production and Heat Damage 

Rice is the most widely produced and consumed staple food for a large part of the  
world’s human population, providing more than 20% of the calories. Rice is widely  
planted around the world, with about 90% of the total production from Asia (south- 
ern Asia 31.44%, East Asia 30.68%, Southeast Asia 27.75%, and West and Central  
Asia 0.27%), 4.86% from the Americas, 4.39% from Africa, 0.57% from Europe,  
and 0.04% from Oceania (data for 2016 from FAO statistics). 
   The world’s top rice producers are mainly in Asia. Many of these Asian countries  
are located in the tropics and subtropics, where the temperature is high during the  
rice crop season, including part of China, India, Indonesia, Bangladesh, Vietnam,  
Myanmar, Thailand, the Philippines, Cambodia, Lao PDR, and Sri Lanka. 
   Temperature stress is a complex interaction of temperature intensity, duration,  
rapidity, and plant growth stage. Damage from extreme high temperature is particu- 
larly severe when it occurs at critical crop developmental stages, particularly the  
reproductive  period.  Optimum  temperature  is  20–30  °C  during  the  reproductive  
stage,  but  temperatures  surpassing  35  °C  have  critical  negative  effects  on  rice  
growth.  High  daytime  temperatures  in  some  of  the  major  tropical  rice-growing  
regions  are  already  close  to  the  threshold  beyond  which  yield  begins  to  decline  
(Prasad et al. 2006; Wassmann et al. 2009a). 
   Rice has been cultivated in a wide range of climatic environments. High tem- 
perature  has  more  effects  in  the  tropics  and  low-altitude  valleys  in  some  of  the  
temperate regions. Above 32 °C, spikelet sterility becomes a major factor affecting  
rice yield, even if sufficient growth occurs in other yield components (Matthews  
et al.  1995). Traditionally, farmers grow rice at optimal seasonal temperatures to  
maximize grain yield. However, with the increase in the frequency of extreme tem- 
perature events, climate change may increase the probability of overlapping peaks  
of  temperature  and  the  flowering  period,  which  diminishes  final  yield  (Teixeira  
et al. 2011). 
   Although there has been no systematic monitoring and evaluation of temperature  
stress-induced yield losses worldwide, heat-vulnerable regions were geographically  
mapped based on the critical temperatures at flowering stage (Jagadish et al. 2014;  
Laborte et al.  2012; Wassmann et al. 2009a). Regional high-temperature damage  
was observed in many tropical and subtropical countries, such as Pakistan, India,  
Bangladesh, China, Thailand, Laos, Japan, Sudan, Australia, and the United States  

----------------------- Page 217-----------------------

206                                                                                   C. Ye et al. 

(Hasegawa et al. 2009; Ishimaru et al. 2016; Matsushima et al. 1982; Osada et al.  
1973; Tian et al. 2009). Analysis of temperature and rice yield during 1992–2003 at  
the International Rice Research Institute (IRRI) showed that rice grain yield declined  
by 10% for each 1 °C increase in growing-season minimum temperature (Peng et al.  
2004). Tian et al. (2009) reported that at least six severe heat events damaged the  
rice crop in the past 50 years in China. Studies on the Yangtze River basin in China  
showed that an estimated 3 million ha of rice were damaged and 5.18 million tons  
of paddy rice were lost in 2003 because of a heat wave with the temperature above  
38 °C lasting for more than 20 days (Li et al. 2004; Xia and Qi 2004; Yang et al.  
2004). In Laos and southern India, the combined stress of heat and intense solar  
radiation during daytime increases the spikelet sterility of local popular cultivars  
when heading coincides with high temperatures (Ishimaru et al. 2016). In the record  
hot summer of 2007, the percentage of spikelet sterility rose to 25% when the maxi- 
mum  daily  temperature  was  around  38  °C  in  the  temperate  regions  of  Japan  
(Hasegawa et al. 2011). High temperature after heading significantly decreased rice  
grain quality in many rice-growing regions of Japan in 2010 (Morita et al. 2016).  
Thus, heat stress at flowering is a real threat to sustained rice production not only in  
tropical and subtropical regions but also in temperate regions. 
    The effect of extreme temperature events on crop production is likely to become  
more frequent in the near future. Significant yield losses have also been predicted  
by using different crop models. Short-term predictions indicated that, by 2030, rice  
production in South Asia could decrease by up to 10% (Lobell et al. 2008). Medium-  
to long-term predictions, that is, by 2080, estimated rice yields in developing coun- 
tries to decrease by 10–25%, while yields in India could drop by 30–40% (Cline  
2008). By 2100, rice and maize yields in the tropics are expected to decrease by  
20–40%  because  of  higher  temperatures,  without  accounting  for  the  decrease  in  
yields as a result of drought enhanced by temperature increases (Battisti and Naylor  
2009).  Spatial  model  simulation  indicated  that  yield  of  boro  rice  in  Bangladesh  
could decrease by 20% and 50% by 2050 and 2070, respectively (Basak et al. 2010),  
and,  on  average,  rice  yields  could  decline  by  up  to  33%  by  2081–2100  (Karim  
et al. 2012). 
    Besides  high  day  temperatures,  night  temperatures  greater  than  29  °C  can  
decrease spikelet fertility in rice with a subsequent decrease in seed set and grain  
yield (Satake and Yoshida  1978; Ziska et al. 1996). The increase in night tempera- 
ture from 27 to 32 °C decreased grain length and grain width, thereby decreasing  
grain yield (Counce et al. 2005; Mohammed and Tarpley 2011; Morita et al. 2005). 

3     Heat Tolerance of Rice 

Heat tolerance is defined as the ability of the plant to grow and produce economic  
yield at high temperature (Wahid et al. 2007). The developmental stage at which the  
plant is exposed to heat stress determines the severity of the possible damage to the  
crop  (Wahid  et  al.  2007).  High  temperature  causes  injury  to  the  rice  plant  at  

----------------------- Page 218-----------------------

Genetics and Breeding of Heat Tolerance in Rice                                              207 

different growth stages, such as poor germination, retarded seedling growth, leaf  
yellowing, inhibited rooting and tillering, inhibited panicle initiation and develop- 
ment,  spikelet  degeneration,  disturbed  pollen  formation,  poor  panicle  exsertion,  
inhibited anther dehiscence and pollination, and poor grain filling and development  
(Yang and Heilman  1993; Yoshida et al. 1981). Thus, heat tolerance is actually the  
responses of different traits to high temperature at different growth stages, for exam- 
ple, seedling growth or survival at the seedling stage, spikelet fertility at the repro- 
ductive  stage,  and  chalkiness  of  grains  at  the  grain-filling  stage  (Ishimaru  et  al.  
2009; Lanning et al. 2011). At the grain-filling stage, high temperature affects cel- 
lular and developmental processes, leading to decreased fertility and grain quality  
(Barnabas et al. 2008). Decreased grain weight, decreased grain filling, and higher  
percentage of chalky grains are common effects of exposure to high temperature  
during the ripening stage in rice (Osada et al. 1973; Yoshida et al. 1981). In addition,  
increased temperature causes a serious decrease in grain size and amylase content  
(Yamakawa et al. 2007; Zhu et al. 2005). 
    Rice  is  relatively  tolerant  of  high  temperatures  during  the  vegetative  phase  
(Prasad et al. 2006; Yoshida et al. 1981), but is highly susceptible during the repro- 
ductive phase, particularly at flowering stage (Jagadish et al.  2008; Matsui et al.  
2001b). High temperature surpassing 35 °C during flowering stage increases pollen  
and spikelet sterility, which leads to significant yield losses, low grain quality, and  
low harvest index (Matsui et al. 1997a, b; Matsushima et al. 1982; Osada et al. 1973;  
Prasad et al. 2006; Zhong et al. 2005). The response of spikelet fertility is a major  
factor determining rice production under high-temperature conditions. Thus, spike- 
let fertility at high temperature has been widely used as a screening index for heat  
tolerance at the reproductive stage (Prasad et al. 2006). 
   Wide  genetic  variation  exists  in  tolerance  of  heat  stress  (Matsui  and  Omasa  
2002).  Large  cultivar  variation  exists  in  spikelet  sensitivity  to  high-temperature  
damage, and the primary cause of this cultivar variation in heat tolerance at flower- 
ing is the number of viable pollen grains shed on the stigma, which is positively  
correlated with basal anther dehiscence (Matsui 2009). 
    It has been suggested that indica varieties are more tolerant of higher tempera- 
tures than japonica  cultivars (Matsui et al. 2000; Satake and Yoshida 1978), although  
heat-tolerant genotypes have been found in both subspecies (Matsui et al.  2001b;  
Prasad et al. 2006). 
    Humidity also plays an important role in rice yield, as higher relative humidity  
(RH) at the flowering stage at increased temperature affects spikelet fertility nega- 
tively (Yan et al. 2010). Field observations in some high-yielding rice areas with a  
drier climate and high temperatures (e.g., New South Wales and southern Iran) sug- 
gested no significant increase in spikelet sterility even at temperatures above 40 °C  
(Wassmann et al. 2009b). The fertility of spikelets at high air temperatures decreased  
further with increased humidity (Matsui et al.  1997a; Nishiyama and Satake 1981).  
An RH of 85–90% at the heading stage induced almost complete grain sterility in  
rice at a day/night temperature of 35/30 °C (Abeysiriwardena et al. 2002). Increasing  
both air temperature and RH significantly increased spikelet sterility, while high  
temperature-induced   sterility   decreased   significantly   with   decreasing   RH.   A  

----------------------- Page 219-----------------------

208                                                                                   C. Ye et al. 

reduction in sterility with decreased RH was more due to decreased spikelet tem- 
perature than to air temperature. Thus, both air temperature and humidity are equally  
important in determining pollen viability, splitting of anthers, pollen shedding, and  
spikelet sterility in rice. The impact of RH should be considered when interpreting  
the effect of high temperature on grain sterility. 
    Heat tolerance at flowering is often tested at 37.5–38.0 °C (with relative humid- 
ity of 60–70%) to have a great contrast in spikelet fertility between susceptible and  
tolerant genotypes (Mackill et al.  1982; Satake and Yoshida 1978; Ye et al. 2015b,  
2012). At the booting stage, 38 °C is a threshold for most rice varieties. Similarly,  
we confirmed that 37 °C is a threshold at flowering stage for most varieties. Above  
this  limit,  pollen  development  will  fail  and  spikelet  fertility  will  decline  signifi- 
cantly (Ye et al. 2015b). 

4     Heat-Tolerant Rice Genetic Resources 

The response of rice to high temperatures differs according to the developmental  
stage. High-temperature tolerance at one developmental stage may or may not nec- 
essarily lead to tolerance during other stages (Wassmann et al. 2009a). Hence, the  
effect of high temperature during different developmental stages has to be parti- 
tioned and evaluated separately for assessing, identifying, and characterizing for  
genetic manipulation of tolerance mechanisms (Wahid et al. 2007). Since flowering  
stage  is  the  most  sensitive  stage  to  high  temperature,  most  screenings  for  heat-  
tolerant germplasm were done at flowering stage. 
    Rice genetic resources tolerant of high temperature have been identified in both  
indica (Matsui et al. 1997b) and japonica  subspecies (Matsui et al. 2001b). N22 and  
Dular  are  excellent  sources  of  genes  for  heat  tolerance  (Manigbas  et  al.  2014).  
Among the heat-tolerant varieties, N22, an Indian aus-type landrace, was identified  
as one of the most heat-tolerant genotypes in both chamber and open-field experi- 
ments (Jagadish et al. 2010a; Mackill et al. 1982; Manigbas et al. 2014; Poli et al.  
2013; Prasad et al. 2006; Ye et al. 2012; Yoshida et al. 1981). N22 has been used as  
a check variety for many studies on heat tolerance. Akitakomachi is the most toler- 
ant genotype found among japonica  rice (Matsui et al. 2001b). 
    A  recent  investigation  using  a  representative  set  of  popular  cultivars  grown  
across highly vulnerable rice-growing regions of South and Southeast Asia, Latin  
America, and West Africa concluded that most of the popular rice cultivars were  
susceptible to heat stress at reproductive stages (Shi et al. 2015). More than 80% of  
hybrid rice combinations in China are heat-susceptible, but some heat-tolerant com- 
binations were found in hybrid rice (Hu et al. 2012; Zhou et al. 2009). The hybrid  
rice Guodao 6 was considered as a heat-tolerant variety (Tao et al. 2008). An acces- 
sion of wild rice, Oryza meridionalis Ng, was also identified as a heat-tolerant spe- 
cies (Scafaro et al. 2010). 
    In japonica  cultivars, Akitakomachi, Nipponbare, Hitomebore, and Todorokiwase  
(Maruyama et al. 2013; Matsui et al. 2001b; Tenorio et al. 2013) are classified as  

----------------------- Page 220-----------------------

Genetics and Breeding of Heat Tolerance in Rice                                          209 

heat-tolerant genotypes. In indica cultivars, IR24, IR36, Ciherang, ADT36, BG90-2,  
Dular,  Huanghuazhan,  AUS17,  M9962,  Sonalee,  and  AUS16  (Cao  et  al.  2008;  
Cheabu et al. 2018; Maruyama et al. 2013; Shi et al. 2015; Tenorio et al. 2013) are  
known as heat-tolerant genotypes. It is notable that Giza178, an Egyptian cultivar  
developed from a japonica-indica  cross, has considerable heat tolerance at booting  
stage as well as flowering stage (Tenorio et al. 2013). 
   Varieties such as Agbede, Carreon, Dular, N22, OS4, P1215936, and Sintiane  
Diofor have high spikelet fertility even at high temperatures (Yoshida et al.  1981).  
The local Iranian landraces Anbori and Hoveaze (probably the same as Hoveyzeh)  
are  tolerant  of  high  temperatures  (Gilani  et  al.  2009).  Cultivars  KRN,  Citanduy,  
Belle patna, and BPB were tolerant of high-temperature treatment at the ripening  
stage (Zakaria et al. 2002). An indica cultivar (HT54) from China was tolerant of  
high temperature at both seedling and grain-filling stages. HT54 seedlings could  
tolerate high temperature up to 48 °C for 79 h (Wei et al. 2013). New Rice for Africa  
line 44 (NERICA-L-44) was also identified as heat tolerant at both vegetative and  
reproductive stages (Bahuguna et al. 2015). 
   As part of IRRI’s initiative to develop improved breeding lines tolerant of high  
temperature, studies were conducted to identify genetic donors of the heat-tolerance  
trait from the IRRI Genebank. A series of trials were conducted using a set of 455  
IRRI   Genebank   accessions   coming   from   “hot”’   countries   (Pakistan,   India,  
Afghanistan,  Iran,  and  Iraq).  However,  few  varieties  (about  5%)  showed  some  
degree of heat tolerance. Twenty-three accessions were selected as potential donors  
for heat tolerance. Dular and Todorokiwase are tolerant at the booting stage, while  
Milyang23 and IR2006-P12-12-2-2 are tolerant at the flowering stage. Giza178 is  
tolerant  at  both  booting  and  flowering  stages.  Darbari  Roodbar,  Larome,  Mulai,  
Giza178, IR2006-P-12-12-2-2, Milyang23, and Todorokiwase were tolerant of high  
temperature  in  the  field  and  growth  chambers.  Other  potential  donors  identified  
based on at least one trait were IR22, IR2307-247-2-2-3, IR6, IR8, MRC603-383,  
Ganjay, Todorokiwase, Giza 178, Giza 159, and Toor Thulla (Tenorio et al. 2013).  
The accessions with heat tolerance at booting and flowering stage are useful geno- 
types for a breeding program to improve heat resilience in terms of spikelet sterility. 

5     Physiology of Heat Tolerance in Rice 

Flowering stage is the most susceptible to high temperatures, followed by booting  
stage. High temperature is more injurious if it occurs just before or during anthesis  
(Satake and Yoshida 1978). Exposure to 41 °C for 4 h at flowering caused irrevers- 
ible damage and plants became completely sterile, whereas this high temperature  
(41 °C) had no effect on spikelet fertility at 1 day before or after flowering (Yoshida  
et al.  1981). The same study also found that pollination of heat-stressed stigmas  
with unstressed pollen as well as self-pollination at 1 h before heat stress application  
did not affect spikelet fertility. These analyses indicated that the heat-sensitive stage  
is about 1 h before and after flowering. High temperature affects anther dehiscence,  

----------------------- Page 221-----------------------

210                                                                                     C. Ye et al. 

pollination, and pollen germination, which then leads to spikelet sterility and yield  
loss (Yoshida et al. 1981). Exposure at anthesis even for just 1–2 h of high tempera- 
ture may result in high spikelet sterility (Jagadish et al. 2007). 
    High temperature at booting stage mainly decreases the fertility of pollen grains,  
while at flowering stage, it mainly decreases the number of pollens shedding on the  
stigma and the germination of pollen grains. The decreased production of pollens at  
elevated temperatures may be attributable to impaired cell division of the micro- 
spore mother cells (Takeoka et al.  1992). The major causes of high temperature-  
induced sterility were decreased pollen shedding and decreased viability of pollen  
grains,  resulting  in  a  lower  number  of  germinated  pollen  grains  on  the  stigma  
(Mackill et al. 1982; Satake and Yoshida 1978). 
    Among physiological processes occurring at anthesis, anther dehiscence is per- 
ceived  to  be  the  most  critical  stage  affected  by  high  temperature  (Matsui  et  al.  
1997a, b, 2000, 2001a). Spikelet opening triggers rapid pollen swelling, leading to  
anther  dehiscence  and  pollen  shedding  from  the  anthers’  apical  and  basal  pores  
(Matsui et al. 2000). Increased basal pore length in a dehisced anther was found to  
contribute  significantly  to  successful  pollination  (Matsui  and  Omasa  2002). The  
anthers of heat-tolerant cultivars dehisce more easily than those of susceptible cul- 
tivars under high-temperature conditions (Mackill et al.  1982; Matsui et al. 1997a,  
b, 2001b; Satake and Yoshida 1978). This is because of the tight closure of the loc- 
ule by the cell layers, which delays locule opening and decreases spikelet fertility at  
high temperature (Matsui and Omasa 2002). 
    In  heat-tolerant  cultivar  N22,  the  dehiscence  of  anthers  begins  soon  after  the  
glumes open and is completed when the anthers are still situated inside the glumes  
on short filaments; thus, pollen grains of N22 could be easily shed onto stigma at  
that  time  (Satake  and Yoshida  1978).  The  heat-tolerant  cultivar  Nipponbare  had  
well-developed cavities in anthers and thick locule walls, which enabled easy rup- 
ture of the septa in response to swelling of pollen (Matsui et al. 2001b). 
    Rice plants, when exposed to high temperatures during critical stages, can avoid  
heat by maintaining their microclimate temperature below critical levels by efficient  
transpiration cooling (Wassmann et al. 2009a). Lower relative humidity of 60% at  
38 °C leads to a higher vapor pressure deficit, facilitating the plant in exploiting its  
transpiration cooling ability (Jagadish et al. 2007). On the basis of the interaction  
between high temperature and relative humidity, rice cultivation regions in the trop- 
ics and subtropics can be classified into hot/dry and hot/humid regions. It can be  
assumed  that  rice  cultivation  in  hot/dry  regions  where  temperatures  may  exceed  
40  °C  (e.g.,  Pakistan,  Iran,  and  India)  has  been  facilitated  through  unintentional  
selection  for  efficient  transpiration  cooling  under  sufficient  supply  of  water. An  
exceptionally high temperature difference of 6.8 °C between crop canopy and ambi- 
ent air temperature (34.5 °C) was recorded in the Riverina region of New South  
Wales, Australia (Matsui et al. 2007). Rice pollen is extremely sensitive to tempera- 
ture and relative humidity and loses its viability within 10 min of shedding (Matsui  
et al. 1997a). Tolerant cultivar Shanyou63 showed a significantly slower decrease in  
pollen activity, pollen germination, and rate of floret fertility vis-à-vis susceptible  
cultivar Teyou559 at 39 °C (Tang et al. 2008). 

----------------------- Page 222-----------------------

Genetics and Breeding of Heat Tolerance in Rice                                           211 

   The temperature inside the spikelet decreases with a reduction in relative humid- 
ity, possibly because of the enhancement of transpiration at low relative humidity  
(Weerakoon et al. 2008). This decrease in temperature inside the spikelet increases  
the  viability  of  pollen  grains. Viable  pollen  grains  absorb  moisture  and  swell  at  
moderate to high relative humidity and create the required pressure for the rupture  
of the septum, which helps in the deposition of pollen on stigma and thus produces  
a fertilized spikelet (Weerakoon et al. 2008). The panicle temperature of Chinese  
hybrid rice exceeded the ambient air temperature by 4 °C under humid and low  
wind  conditions  and  also  caused  a  severe  decrease  in  spikelet  fertility  (Tian  
et al. 2010). 
   Cultivar  NL-44  has  high  heat  tolerance  at  both  vegetative  and  reproductive  
stages. NL-44 under extreme heat stress retained the ability to maintain higher chlo- 
rophyll (relative greenness) and photosynthesis, a feature that could sustain its sur- 
vival under severe heat stress during both the vegetative and reproductive stages.  
NL-44  and  the  heat-tolerant  check  N22  consistently  displayed  lower  membrane  
damage  and  higher  antioxidant  enzyme  activity  across  leaves  and  spikelets  
(Bahuguna et al. 2015). 

6     Genetics of Heat Tolerance in Rice 

Heat tolerance is controlled by not only one major gene but also several genes.  
The identification of quantitative trait loci (QTLs) is a promising approach to  
dissect the genetic basis of heat tolerance. By using genetic resources with heat  
tolerance at flowering, QTL mapping studies for heat tolerance (spikelet fertil- 
ity)  have  been  conducted  on  various  rice  populations  at  booting  (Zhao  et  al.  
2006) and flowering stages (Cao et al. 2003; Chen et al. 2008; Cheng et al. 2012;  
Jagadish  et  al.  2010a;  Xiao  et  al. 2011b; Ye  et  al. 2015b,  2012;  Zhang  et  al.  
2009, 2008). About 60 QTLs associated with heat tolerance at flowering stage  
have been identified so far. For example, two major QTLs were identified on  
chromosome  1  (qHTSF1.1)  and  chromosome  4  (qHTSF4.1)  in  an  IR64/N22  
population. These two major QTLs could explain 12.6% (qHTSF1.1) and 17.6%  
(qHTSF4.1) of the variation in spikelet fertility at high temperature (Ye et al.  
2012).  Four  QTLs  were  identified  in  an  IR64/Giza178  population,  two  other  
QTLs were identified in a Milyang23/Giza178 population, and five QTLs were  
identified in the three-way cross population IR64//Milyang23/Giza178. Three  
of these QTLs were identified in both biparental and three-way populations (Ye  
et  al.  2015b).  Recently,  two  QTLs  with  high  genetic  effect  (qSTIPSS9.1  and  
qSTIY5.1/qSSIY5.2)  were  mapped  in  less  than  400  kbp  genomic  regions  
(Shanmugavadivel et al. 2017). QTLs for other heat tolerance- related traits such  
as anther length, apical dehiscence length, basal dehiscence length, and percent- 
age of longitudinal dehiscence (Tanveer et al. 2015) and pollen fertility (Xiao  
et al. 2011a) were also detected. 

----------------------- Page 223-----------------------

212                                                                                   C. Ye et al. 

    Among the several identified QTLs, the most promising QTLs for heat toler- 
ance across different genetic backgrounds and locations have been identified on  
chromosomes 1 and 4 (Jagadish et al. 2010a; Xiao et al. 2011b; Ye et al. 2015b,  
2012). The heat-tolerant QTL (qHTSF4.1) on chromosome 4 was identified in  
different populations of heat-tolerant rice varieties 996, N22, Milyang23, and  
Giza178 (Raddatz et al. 2001; Xiao et al. 2011b; Ye et al. 2012). The QTL inter- 
val  was  fine-mapped  to  1.2  Mb.  The  heat  tolerance  (spikelet  fertility)  of  the  
near-isogenic line (NIL) carrying qHTSF4.1 increased consistently in all of the  
backcross populations. In BC F  , the spikelet fertility of plants with qHTSF4.1 3 3 
(34.7  ±  14.2%)  was  significantly  higher  than  in  those  without  the  QTL  
(22.5 ± 7.9%) and in the recurrent parent IR64 (15.1 ± 6.3%), whereas, in BC F  , 5            2 
the spikelet fertility of plants with qHTSF4.1 (44.6 ± 13.1%) was significantly  
higher than in plants without the QTL (27.1 ± 9.6%) and in the recurrent parent  
IR64 (19.4 ± 8.4%) (Ye et al. 2015a). 
    Recently, a thermotolerance gene (TT1) in African rice (O. glaberrima) vari- 
ety CG14 was identified and cloned (Li et al.  2015). Gene  TT1 encodes an  α2  
subunit of the 26S proteasome involved in the degradation of ubiquitinated pro- 
teins. Ubiquitylome analysis indicated that OgTT1 protects cells from heat stress  
through  more  efficient  elimination  of  cytotoxic  denatured  proteins  and  more  
effective  maintenance  of  heat-response  processes  than  achieved  with  OsTT1.  
Overexpression of OgTT1 was associated with markedly enhanced thermotoler- 
ance  in  rice  at  seedling,  flowering,  and  grain-filling  stages  (Li  et  al.  2015). A  
gene for heat tolerance at seedling stage (OsHTAS) was also cloned and charac- 
terized.  OsHTAS encodes a ubiquitin ligase localized in the nucleus and cyto- 
plasm. OsHTAS was responsive to multiple stresses and was strongly induced by  
exogenous ABA. OsHTAS modulated hydrogen peroxide accumulation in shoots,  
altered the stomatal aperture status of rice leaves, and promoted ABA biosynthe- 
sis.  The  RING  finger  ubiquitin  E3  ligase  OsHTAS  functions  in  leaf  blades  to  
enhance heat tolerance through modulation of hydrogen peroxide-induced sto- 
matal closure and is involved in both ABA-dependent and drought- and salt-tol- 
erance-mediated pathways (Liu et al. 2016). 
    Reverse genetic approaches were also employed to identify the genes for heat  
tolerance at anthesis. Expression analyses revealed that at least 13 genes were des- 
ignated  as  high  temperature-repressed  genes  in  the  anther.  These  genes  were  
expressed specifically in the immature anther, mainly in the tapetum at the micro- 
spore stage, and downregulated after 1 day of high temperature. High temperatures  
may disrupt some of the tapetum functions required for pollen adhesion and germi- 
nation on the stigma (Endo et al. 2009). 
    A proteomic analysis compared proteins expressed in heat-stressed anthers from  
three rice varieties with different temperature tolerances. The temperature-tolerant  
rice genotype (N22) showed a higher accumulation of small heat shock proteins  
(sHSP) than the temperature-sensitive rice genotype (Moroberekan). The moder- 
ately tolerant rice genotype (IR64) showed intermediate sHSP accumulation. The  
accumulation  of  sHSP  may  confer  greater  heat  tolerance  in  N22  rice  (Jagadish  
et al. 2010b). 

----------------------- Page 224-----------------------

Genetics and Breeding of Heat Tolerance in Rice                                          213 

7     Breeding of Heat Tolerance in Rice 

Breeding heat-tolerant rice is one of the most important strategies used to mitigate  
the effects of climate change, particularly in the hot Asian countries where most rice  
is grown. However, breeding rice varieties tolerant of high temperature has so far  
received little attention as compared to other abiotic stresses such as drought and  
salinity. After one comprehensive study in the early 1980s (Mackill  1981; Mackill  
and Coffman 1983; Mackill et al. 1982), high-temperature tolerance of rice has been  
treated only within region-specific breeding programs, with limited success. Using  
identified genetic resources and QTLs to improve heat tolerance in rice varieties has  
not been achieved. 
   QTLs for rice heat tolerance at flowering have been mapped on all chromosomes  
by using various rice populations (Cao et al.  2003; Chen et al. 2008; Cheng et al.  
2012; Jagadish et al. 2010a; Xiao et al. 2011b; Zhang et al. 2009, 2008). However,  
the additive effect of each QTL is low. Introducing one or a few QTLs into a variety  
may not sufficiently increase its heat tolerance. Therefore, it is necessary to validate  
and characterize more QTLs and design SNP chips with QTL-linked markers to  
accelerate selection and incorporation of multiple QTLs to improve the efficiency of  
heat-tolerance breeding. 
   To mitigate heat-induced spikelet sterility, two strategies have been proposed.  
One is to develop cultivars that shed larger numbers of pollen grains or produce pol- 
len grains able to germinate at high temperatures. Another strategy is to breed culti- 
vars that escape heat at flowering because of their early-morning flowering (EMF)  
trait (Satake and Yoshida  1978). The EMF trait could be beneficial for decreasing  
yield loss from rising temperatures. The use of germplasm with the EMF trait could  
help to diminish anticipated yield losses caused by spikelet sterility at anthesis as a  
result of expected global warming (Ishimaru et al. 2010). 
   Spikelets are highly susceptible to heat stress at flowering; however, they remain  
fertile when flowering occurs 1 h prior to heat stress, because fertilization is com- 
pleted within 1 h after flowering (Satake and Yoshida  1978). Shifting the time of  
anthesis  to  early  hours  of  the  cooler  morning  will  help  plants  to  escape  high-  
temperature stress during processes of pollen shed, pollination, and fertilization and  
can thus minimize sterility caused by high temperatures. It has been suggested that  
there is a potential for genetic improvement to advance flowering to an earlier time  
of day in current high-yielding cultivars (Nishiyama and Blanco  1980). The EMF  
strategy has been used to produce introgression lines with the EMF trait transferred  
from wild rice O. officinalis. EMF NILs carrying qEMF3 had earlier flower opening  
time by 1.5–2.0 h than recurrent parents, which decreased heat-induced sterility at  
flowering at elevated temperature. It was demonstrated that the shift in flower open- 
ing time to early morning is effective for escaping from heat stress at flower opening  
(Hirabayashi et al. 2015; Ishimaru et al. 2010). Pyramiding lines with QTLs for heat  
tolerance  (qHTSF4.1)  and  EMF  (qEMF3)  effectively  improved  heat  tolerance  at  
flowering in both controlled and field conditions. 

----------------------- Page 225-----------------------

214                                                                                     C. Ye et al. 

    The development of new heat-tolerant rice varieties is among the best approaches  
to address changing climatic conditions in affected farming communities. Breeding  
heat-tolerant rice began in 2010 in the Philippines to develop new rice genotypes  
that could adapt to changing climatic and local farming conditions. By combining a  
heat-tolerant  donor  parent,  such  as  N22,  with  high-yielding  and  better  cultivars,  
selecting new genotypes with better adaptation to emerging climatic conditions is  
possible (Manigbas et al. 2014). 
    To increase the heat tolerance of a rice variety named Improved White Ponni  
(IWP), heat-tolerance QTLs qHTSF1.1 and qHTSF4.1 (Ye et al. 2012) were intro- 
gressed from Nagina 22 into IWP through marker-assisted breeding. The progenies  
harboring both qHTSF1.1 and qHTSF4.1 showed higher fertility percentages under  
high-temperature  stress  at  the  flowering  stage.  The  results  confirmed  that  these  
QTLs  were  responsible  for  maintaining  membrane  integrity  and  yield  under  
elevated- temperature conditions (Vivitha et al. 2017). 
    Moreover, recent studies showed that heat tolerance at flowering stage in rice is  
controlled by recessive genes (Fu et al.  2015; Ye et al. 2015b, 2012). Thus, both  
parents should possess high-temperature tolerance to develop heat-tolerant F  com-1 
binations. Male parents play a more important role in heat-tolerant combinations  
than female parents. The heat susceptibility of hybrid rice in China is mainly due to  
the wide application of heat-susceptible restorer lines with high yield in three-line  
hybrid rice breeding (Fu et al. 2015). Therefore, it is important to improve the heat  
tolerance of both parents of hybrid rice combinations. 

8     Future Prospects 

Booting and flowering are the stages most sensitive to high temperature, which may  
sometimes lead to significant sterility. Great variation exists among rice germplasm  
in response to temperature stress. Flowering at cooler times of day, more pollen  
viability, larger anthers, longer basal dehiscence, and the presence of long basal  
pores   are   some   of   the   phenotypic   markers   for   high-temperature   tolerance.  
Replacement of heat-sensitive cultivars with heat-tolerant ones, adjustment of sow- 
ing time, choice of varieties with a growth duration allowing avoidance of peak  
stress periods, and exogenous application of plant hormones are some of the adap- 
tive measures that will help to mitigate the forecast yield decrease due to global  
warming (Shah et al. 2011). Staggered planting dates and short-duration varieties  
are  advocated  as  some  of  the  options  to  escape  from  high-temperature  stress.  
Synchronizing critical growth stages with most favorable weather is another prac- 
tice  for  avoiding  extreme  temperature.  However,  cultural  practices  alone  are  not  
adequate and yield loss can be minimized further by combining such methods with  
genetic improvement. 
    There is a continuous need to integrate disciplines, such as structural genomics,  
transcriptomics,  proteomics,  and  metabolomics,  with  plant  physiology  and  plant  
breeding (Varshney et al. 2005). By using the wide diversity of rice germplasm, we  

----------------------- Page 226-----------------------

Genetics and Breeding of Heat Tolerance in Rice                                                      215 

will be able to explore the novel QTLs and alleles that are expected to have different  
effects  from  the  identified  QTLs.  However,  conventional  breeding  still  offers  an  
opportunity  for  significant  and  predictable  incremental  improvements  in  high-  
temperature tolerance of new rice cultivars. Among the QTLs identified for rice heat  
tolerance at flowering stage, even QTLs with a large effect can explain only approx- 
imately 20% of the variation, and the additive effect of each QTL is low. Introducing  
one or a few QTLs into a genetic background may not be sufficient to significantly  
increase its heat tolerance. More heat-tolerance donors and QTLs need to be identi- 
fied and used in our breeding programs. 
    Heat-induced spikelet sterility at flowering and early-morning flowering is diffi- 
cult traits for precise phenotyping in large mapping populations. Future research  
activities  should  be  aimed  at  identifying  and  breeding  heat-tolerant  germplasm  
accessions that exploit the variation in both genotypic and morphological charac- 
ters. Several approaches should be actively exploited to improve heat tolerance in  
current  cultivars,  including  discovery  and  exploitation  of  new  genes  and  alleles,  
improved breeding efficiency, marker-assisted selection, and genetic modification  
(Shah et al. 2011). Marker-assisted gene pyramiding and marker-assisted recurrent  
selection can be used to improve breeding efficiency for heat tolerance. The cloning  
of  causal  genes  will  unveil  the  complex  genetic  control  of  each  trait  under  heat  
stress. Further genetic efforts are required for the development of heat-resilient rice  
varieties to cope with the challenges of climate change. 

References 

Abeysiriwardena DS, Ohba K, Maruyama A (2002) Influence of temperature and relative humidity  
    on grain sterility in rice. J Natl Sci Found Sri Lanka 30:33–41 
Bahuguna RN, Jha J, Madan P, Shah D, Lawas ML, Khetarpal S, Jagadish S (2015) Physiological  
    and biochemical characterization of NERICA-L 44: a novel source of heat tolerance at the  
    vegetative and reproductive stages in rice. Physiol Plant 154:543–559 
Barnabas B, Jager K, Feher A (2008) The effect of drought and heat stress on reproductive pro- 
    cesses in cereals. Plant Cell Environ 31:11–38 
Basak J, Ali M, Islam MN, Rashid M (2010) Assessment of the effect of climate change on boro  
    rice production in Bangladesh using DSSAT model. J Civ Eng 38:95–108 
Battisti  DS,  Naylor  R  (2009)  Historical  warning  of  future  food  insecurity  with  unprecedented  
    seasonal heat. Science 323:240–244 
Cao L, Zhao J, Zhan X, Li D, He L, Cheng S (2003) Mapping QTLs for heat tolerance and cor- 
    relation between heat tolerance and photosynthetic rate in rice. Chin J Rice Sci 17:223–227 
Cao YY, Duan H, Yang LN, Wang ZQ, Zhou SC, Yang J (2008) Effect of heat stress during meiosis  
    on grain yield of rice cultivars differing in heat tolerance and its physiological mechanism. Acta  
    Agron Sin 34:2134–2142 
Cheabu S, Moung-Ngam P, Arikit S, Vanavichit A, Malumpong C (2018) Effects of heat stress at  
    vegetative and reproductive stages on spikelet fertility. Rice Sci 25:218–226 
Chen Q, Yu S, Li C, Mou T (2008) Identification of QTLs for heat tolerance at flowering stage in  
    rice. Sci Agric Sin 41:315–321 
Cheng L, Wang J, Uzokwe V, Meng L, Wang Y, Sun Y, Zhu L, Xu J, Li Z (2012) Genetic analysis of  
    cold tolerance at seedling stage and heat tolerance at anthesis in rice. J Integr Agric 11:359–367 

----------------------- Page 227-----------------------

216                                                                                       C. Ye et al. 

Cline  W  (2008)  Global  warming  and  agriculture.  International  Monetary  Fund,  Washington,  
    DC. http://www.imf.org/external/pubs/ft/fandd/2008/03/pdf/cline.pdf. Accessed 5 Aug 2018 
Counce PA, Bryant RJ, Bergman CJ, Bautista RC, Wang YJ, Siebenmorgen TJ, Modenhauer KAK,  
    Meullenet J (2005) Rice milling quality, grain dimensions, and starch branching as affected by  
    high night temperatures. Cereal Chem 82:645–648 
Endo M, Tsuchiya T, Hamada K, Kawamura S, Yano K, Ohshima M, Higashitani A, Watanabe  
    M, Kawagishi-Kobayashi M (2009) High temperatures cause male sterility in rice plants with  
    transcriptional alterations during pollen development. Plant Cell Physiol 50:1911–1922 
Fu G, Zhang C, Yang Y, Xiong J, Yang X, Zhang X, Jin Q, Tao L (2015) Male parent plays a more  
    important role in heat tolerance in three-line hybrid rice. Rice Sci 22:116–122 
Gilani AA, Siadat SA, Alami Saeed K, Bakhshandeh AM, Moradi F, Seidnejad M (2009) Effect of  
    heat stress on grain yield stability, chlorophyll content and cell membrane stability of flag leaf  
    in commercial rice cultivars in Khuzestan. Iranian J Crop Sci 11(1):82–100 
Hasegawa T, Yoshimoto M, Kuwagata T, Ishigooka Y, Kondo M, Ishimaru T (2009) The impact of  
    global warming on rice production: lessons from spikelet sterility observed under the record  
    hot summer of 2007. NIAES annual report 2008. NIAES, Tsukuba, pp 23–25 
Hasegawa T, Ishimaru T, Kondo M, Kuwagata T, Yoshimoto M, Fukuoka M (2011) Spikelet steril- 
    ity of rice observed in the record hot summer of 2007 and the factors associated with its varia- 
    tion. J Agric Meteorol 67:225–232 
Hirabayashi  H,  Sasaki  K,  Kambe  T,  Gannaban  RB,  Miras  MA,  Mendioro  MS,  Simon  EV,  
    Lumanglas  PD,  Fujita  D, Takemoto-Kuno Y, Takeuchi Y,  Kaji  R,  Kondo  M,  Kobayashi  N,  
    Ogawa T, Ando I, Jagadish KS, Ishimaru T (2015) qEMF3, a novel QTL for the early-morning  
    flowering trait from wild rice, Oryza officinalis, to mitigate heat stress damage at flowering in  
    rice, O. sativa. J Exp Bot 66:1227–1236 
Hu SB, Zhang YP, Zhu DF, Lin XQ, Xiang J (2012) Evaluation of heat resistance in hybrid rice.  
    Chin J Rice Sci 26:751–756 
IPCC  (2013)  Climate  change  2013:  the  physical  science  basis.  Cambridge  University  Press,  
    Cambridge; New York, NY 
IPCC (2014) Climate change 2014: impacts, adaptation and vulnerability: Part A: Global and sec- 
    toral aspects: Working Group II contribution to the IPCC Fifth Assessment report. Cambridge  
    University Press, Cambridge 
Ishimaru T, Horigan AK, Ida M, Iwasawa N, San-Oh YA, Nakazono M, Nishizawa NK, Masumura  
    T, Kondo M, Yoshida M (2009) Formation of grain chalkiness and changes in water distribution  
    in developing rice caryopses grown under high-temperature stress. J Cereal Sci 50:166–174 
Ishimaru T, Hirabayashi H, Ida M, Takai T, San-Oh YA, Yoshinaga S, Ando I, Ogawa T, Kondo  
    M (2010) A genetic resource for early-morning flowering trait of wild rice Oryza officinalis to  
    mitigate high temperature-induced spikelet sterility at anthesis. Ann Bot 106:515–520 
Ishimaru T, Seefong X, Nallathambi J, Rajendran S, Yoshimoto M, Phoudalay L, Benjamin S,  
    Hasegawa  T,  Hayashi  K,  Gurusamy A,  Muthurajan  R,  Jagadish  S  (2016)  Quantifying  rice  
    spikelet sterility in potential heat-vulnerable regions: field surveys in southern Laos and south- 
    ern India. Field Crop Res 190:3–9 
Jagadish SVK, Craufurd PQ, Wheeler T (2007) High temperature stress and spikelet fertility in  
    rice. J Exp Bot 58:1627–1635 
Jagadish SVK, Craufurd PQ, Wheeler T (2008) Phenotyping rice mapping population parents for  
    heat tolerance during anthesis. Crop Sci 48:1140–1146 
Jagadish SVK, Cairns J, Lafitte R, Wheeler TR, Price AH, Craufurd PQ (2010a) Genetic analysis  
    of heat tolerance at anthesis in rice. Crop Sci 50:1633–1641 
Jagadish SVK, Muthurajan R, Oane R, Wheeler TR, Heuer S, Bennett J, Craufurd PQ (2010b)  
    Physiological and proteomic approaches to address heat tolerance during anthesis in rice. J  
    Exp Bot 61:143–156 
Jagadish SVK, Murty MVR, Quick W (2014) Rice responses to raising temperatures: challenges,  
    perspectives and future directions. Plant Cell Environ 38:1686–1698 

----------------------- Page 228-----------------------

Genetics and Breeding of Heat Tolerance in Rice                                                  217 

Jansen E, Overpeck J, Briffa KR, Duplessy JC, Joos F, Masson-Delmotte V, Olago D, Otto-Bliesner  
    B, Peltier WR, Rahmstorf S, Ramesh R, Raynaud D, Rind D, Solomina O, Villalba R, Zhang  
    D (2007) Palaeoclimate. In: Solomon S, Qin D, Manning M, Chen Z, Marquis M, Averyt KB,  
    Tignor M, Miller HL (eds) Climate change 2007: the physical science basis. Contribution of  
    Working Group I to the Fourth Assessment report of the intergovernmental panel on climate  
    change. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge; New York, NY 
Karim MR, Ishikawa M, Ikeda M, Islam M (2012) Climate change model predicts 33% rice yield  
    decrease in 2100 in Bangladesh. Agron Sustain Dev 32:821–830 
Laborte A, Nelson A, Jagadish K, Aunario J, Sparks A, Ye C, Redoña E (2012) Rice feels the heat.  
    Rice Today 3:30–31 
Lanning SB, Siebenmorgen TJ, Counce PA, Ambardekar AA, Mauromoustakos A (2011) Extreme  
    night time air temperatures in 2010 impact rice chalkiness and milling quality. Field Crop Res  
    124:132–136 
Li C, Peng C, Zhao Q, Xie P, Chen W (2004) Characteristic analysis of the abnormal high tempera- 
    ture in 2003 midsummer in Wuhan City. J Centr China Normal Univ 38:379–381 
Li X, Chao D, Wu Y, Huang X, Chen K, Cui L, Su L, Ye W, Chen H, Chen H, Dong N, Guo T,  
    Shi M, Feng Q, Zhang P, Han B, Shan J, Gao J, Lin H (2015) Natural alleles of a protea- 
    some α2 subunit gene contribute to thermotolerance and adaptation of African rice. Nat Genet  
    47:827–833 
Liu J, Zhang C, Wei C, Liu X, Wang M, Yu F, Xie Q, Tu J (2016) The RING finger ubiquitin E3  
    ligase OsHTAS enhances heat tolerance by promoting H2O -induced stomatal closure in rice. 2 
    Plant Physiol 170:429–443 
Lobell DB, Burke MB, Tebaldi C, Mastrandrea MD, Falcon WP, Naylor RL (2008) Prioritizing  
    climate change adaptation needs for food security in 2030. Science 319:607–610 
Mackill DJ (1981) Studies on the mechanism and genetics of high temperature tolerance in rice.  
    University of California-Davis, Davis, CA 
Mackill DJ, Coffman W (1983) Inheritance of high temperature tolerance and pollen shedding in  
    a rice cross. Z Pflanzen 91:61–69 
Mackill DJ, Coffman WR, Rutger J (1982) Pollen shedding and combining ability for high tem- 
    perature tolerance in rice. Crop Sci 22:730–733 
Manigbas NL, Lambio LAF, Madrid LB, Cardenas C (2014) Germplasm innovation of heat toler- 
    ance in rice for irrigated lowland conditions in the Philippines. Rice Sci 21:162–169 
Maruyama A, Weerakoon W, Wakiyama Y, Ohba K (2013) Effects of increasing temperatures on  
    spikelet fertility in different rice cultivars based on temperature gradient chamber experiments.  
    J Agron Crop Sci 199:416–423 
Matsui T (2009) Floret sterility induced by high temperatures at the flowering stage in rice. Jpn J  
    Crop Sci 78:303–311 
Matsui T, Omasa K (2002) Rice cultivars tolerant to high temperature at flowering: anther charac- 
    teristics. Ann Bot 89:683–687 
Matsui T, Omasa K, Horie T (1997a) High temperature induced spikelet sterility of japonica rice at  
    flowering in relation to air humidity and wind velocity conditions. Jpn J Crop Sci 66:449–455 
Matsui T, Namuco OS, Ziska LH, Horie T (1997b) Effects of high temperature and CO2 concentra- 
    tion on spikelet sterility in indica rice. Field Crop Res 51:213–219 
Matsui T, Omasa K, Horie T (2000) High temperature at flowering inhibits swelling of pollen  
    grains, a driving force for thecae dehiscence in rice. Plant Prod Sci 3:430–434 
Matsui T, Omasa K, Horie T (2001a) Comparison between anthers of two rice cultivars with toler- 
    ance to high temperature at flowering or susceptibility. Plant Prod Sci 4:36–40 
Matsui T, Omasa K, Horie T (2001b) The differences in sterility due to high temperature during the  
    flowering period among japonica rice varieties. Plant Prod Sci 4:90–93 
Matsui T, Kobayasi K, Yoshimoto M, Hasegawa T (2007) Stability of rice pollination in the field  
    under hot and dry conditions in the Riverina Region of New South Wales, Australia. Plant Prod  
    Sci 10:57–63 

----------------------- Page 229-----------------------

218                                                                                         C. Ye et al. 

Matsushima S, Ikewada H, Maeda A, Honda S, Niki H (1982) Studies on rice cultivation in the  
    tropics. I. Yielding and ripening responses of the rice plant to the extremely hot and dry climate  
    in Sudan. Jpn J Trop Agric 26:19–25 
Matthews RB, Kropff MJ, Bachelet D, Laar HV (1995) Modelling the impact of climate change  
    on rice production in Asia. Springer, International Rice Research Institute, Berlin, Los Baños 
Mohammed RA, Tarpley L (2011) Effects of night temperature, spikelet position and salicylic acid  
    on yield and yield-related parameters of rice plants. J Agron Crop Sci 197:40–49 
Morita S, Yonemaru J, Takanashi J (2005) Grain growth and endosperm cell size under high night  
    temperatures in rice. Ann Bot 95:695–701 
Morita S, Wada H, Matsue Y (2016) Countermeasures for heat damage in rice grain quality under  
    climate change. Plant Prod Sci 19:1–11 
Nishiyama I, Blanco L (1980) Avoidance of high temperature sterility by flower opening in the  
    early morning. Jpn Agric Res Q 14:116–117 
Nishiyama I, Satake T (1981) High temperature damage in the rice plant. Jpn J Trop Agric 25:14–19 
NOAA  (2011)  State  of  the  climate:  global  analysis  for  annual  2011.  NOAA,  Washington,  
    DC. http://www.ncdc.noaa.gov/sotc/global/2011/13. Accessed 6 Aug 2018 
Osada A, Sasiprapa V, Rahong M, Dhammanuvong S, Chakrabandho H (1973) Abnormal occur- 
    rence of empty grains of indica rice plants in the dry hot season in Thailand. Proc Crop Sci Soc  
    Jpn 42:103–109 
Pachauri RK, Reisinger A (2007) Climate change 2007: synthesis report. IPCC, Geneva 
Peng S, Huang J, Sheehy JE, Laza RC, Visperas RM, Zhong X, Centeno GS, Khush GS, Cassman  
    KG (2004) Rice yields decline with higher night temperature from global warming. Proc Natl  
    Acad Sci U S A 101:9971–9975 
Poli Y, Basava RK, Panigrahy M, Vinukonda VP, Dokula NR, Voleti SR, Desiraju S, Neelamraju  
    S (2013) Characterization of a Nagina22 rice mutant for heat tolerance and mapping of yield  
    traits. Rice 6:36 
Prasad PVV, Boote KJ, Allen LH, Sheehy JE, Thomas J (2006) Species, ecotype and cultivar dif- 
    ferences in spikelet fertility and harvest index of rice in response to high temperature stress.  
    Field Crop Res 95:398–411 
Raddatz G, Dehio M, Meyer TF, Dehio C (2001) PrimeArray: genome-scale primer design for  
    DNA-microarray construction. Bioinformatics 17:98–99 
Rosenzweig C, Iglesias A, Yang XB, Epstein PR, Chivian E (2001) Climate change and extreme  
    weather events. Glob Change Hum Health 2:90–104 
Satake T, Yoshida S (1978) High temperature induced sterility in Indica rice at flowering. Jpn J  
    Crop Sci 47:6–17 
Scafaro AP, Haynes PA, Atwell B (2010) Physiological and molecular changes in Oryza meridi- 
    onalis Ng., a heat-tolerant species of wild rice. J Exp Bot 61:191–202 
Shah F, Huang J, Cui K, Nie L, Shah T, Chen C, Wang K (2011) Impact of high-temperature stress  
    on rice plant and its traits related to tolerance. J Agric Sci 149:545–556 
Shanmugavadivel PS, Mithra SVA, Prakash C, Ramkumar MK, Tiwari R, Mohapatra T, Singh  
    N (2017) High resolution mapping of QTLs for heat tolerance in rice using a 5K SNP array.  
    Rice 10:28 
Shi W, Ishimaru T, Gannaban RB, Oane W, Jagadish S (2015) Popular rice cultivars show contrast- 
    ing responses to heat stress at gametogenesis and anthesis. Crop Sci 55:589–596 
Solomon S, Qin D, Manning M, Chen Z, Marquis M, Averyt K, Tigno M, Miller H (2007) IPCC  
    AR4 WG1.  Climate  change  2007:  the  physical  science  basis.  Cambridge  University  Press,  
    Cambridge 
Tabaldi  C,  Hayhoe  K,  Arblaster  J,  Meehl  G  (2006)  Going  to  the  extremes.  Climate  Change  
    79:185–211 
Takeoka Y, Mamun A, Wada T, Kaufman P (1992) Primary features of the effect of environmental  
    stress on rice spikelet morphogenesis. Dev Crop Sci 22:113–141 

----------------------- Page 230-----------------------

Genetics and Breeding of Heat Tolerance in Rice                                                            219 

Tang RS, Zheng JC, Jin ZQ, Zhang DD, Huang YH, Chen L (2008) Possible correlation between  
    high temperature-induced floret sterility and endogenous levels of IAA, GAs and ABA in rice.  
    Plant Growth Regul 54:37–43 
Tanveer T, Kobayashi Y, Koyama H, Matsui T (2015) QTL analyses for anther length and dehis- 
    cence  at  flowering  as  traits  for  the  tolerance  of  extreme  temperatures  in  rice.  Euphytica  
    203:629–642 
Tao L, Tan H, Wang X, Cao L, Song J, Chen S (2008) Effects of high-temperature stress on flower- 
    ing and grain-setting characteristics of Guodao 6. Acta Agron Sin 34:609–614 
Teixeira E, Fischer G, Velthuizen H, Walter C, Ewert F (2011) Global hot-spots of heat stress on  
    agricultural crops due to climate change. Agric For Meteorol 170:206–215 
Tenorio  FA, Ye  C,  Redoña  E,  Sierra  S,  Laza  M, Argayoso  MA  (2013)  Screening  rice  genetic  
    resources for heat tolerance. SABRAO J Breed Genet 45:341–351 
Tian X, Luo H, Zhou H, Wu C (2009) Research on heat stress of rice in China: progress and pros- 
    pect. Chin Agric Sci Bull 25:166–168 
Tian X, Matsui T, Li S, Yoshimoto M, Kobayasi K, Hasegawa T (2010) Heat-induced floret sterility  
    of hybrid rice (Oryza sativa L.) cultivars under humid and low wind conditions in the field of  
    Jianghan basin, China. Plant Prod Sci 13:243–251 
Varshney RK, Graner A, Sorrells M (2005) Genomics-assisted breeding for crop improvement.  
    Trends Plant Sci 10:621–630 
Vivitha P, Raveendran M, Vijayalakshmi D (2017) Introgression of QTLs controlling spikelet fer- 
    tility maintains membrane integrity and grain yield in Improved White Ponni derived progenies  
    exposed to heat stress. Rice Sci 24:32–40 
Wahid A, Gelani S, Ashraf M, Foolad M (2007) Heat tolerance in plants: an overview. Environ  
    Exp Bot 61:199–223 
Wassmann R, Jagadish SVK, Heuer S, Ismail A, Redoña E, Serraj R, Singh RK, Howell G, Pathak  
    H, Sumfleth K (2009a) Climate change affecting rice production: the physiological and agro- 
    nomic basis for possible adaptation strategies. Adv Agron 101:59–122 
Wassmann R, Jagadish SVK, Sumfleth K, Pathak H, Howell G, Ismail A, Serraj R, Redoña E,  
    Singh RK, Heuer S (2009b) Regional vulnerability of climate change impacts on Asian rice  
    production and scope for adaptation. Adv Agron 102:91–133 
Weerakoon W, Maruyama A, Ohba K (2008) Impact of humidity on temperature-induced grain  
    sterility in rice. J Agron Crop Sci 194:135–140 
Wei H, Liu J, Wang Y, Huang N, Zhang X, Wang L, Zhang J, Tu J, Zhong X (2013) A dominant  
    major locus in chromosome 9 of rice (Oryza sativa L.) confers tolerance to 48°C high tempera- 
    ture at seedling stage. J Hered 104:287–294 
Xia M, Qi H (2004) Effects of high temperature on the seed setting percent of hybrid rice breed  
    with four male sterile lines. Hubei Agric Sci 2:21–22 
Xiao Y, Pan Y, Luo L, Deng H, Zhang G, Tang W, Chen L (2011a) Quantitative trait loci associ- 
    ated  with  pollen  fertility  under  high  temperature  stress  at  flowering  stage  in  rice.  Rice  Sci  
    18:204–209 
Xiao Y,  Pan Y,  Luo  L,  Zhang  G,  Deng  H,  Dai  L,  Liu  X,  Tang  W,  Chen  L,  Wang  G  (2011b)  
    Quantitative trait loci associated with seed set under high temperature stress at the flowering  
    stage in rice. Euphytica 178:331–338 
Yamakawa H, Hirose T, Kuroda M, Yamaguchi T (2007) Comprehensive expression profiling of  
    rice grain filling-related genes under high temperature using DNA microarray. Plant Physiol  
    144:258–277 
Yan C, Ding Y, Wang Q, Liu Z, Li G, Muhammad I, Wang S (2010) The impact of relative humid- 
    ity, genotypes and fertilizer application rates on panicle, leaf temperature, fertility and seed  
    setting of rice. J Agric Sci 148:329–339 
Yang C, Heilman J (1993) Responses of rice to short term high temperature: growth development  
    and yield. J Agric Res China 42:1–11 
Yang H, Huang ZQ, Jiang ZY, Wang X (2004) High temperature damage and its protective tech- 
    nologies of early and middle season rice in Anhui province. J Anhui Agric Sci 32:3–4 

----------------------- Page 231-----------------------

220                                                                                      C. Ye et al. 

Ye C, Argayoso M, Redoña E, Sierra S, Laza M, Dilla C, Mo Y, Thomson M, Chin J, Delaviña C,  
    Diaz G, Hernandez J (2012) Mapping QTL for heat tolerance at flowering stage in rice using  
    SNP markers. Plant Breed 131:33–41 
Ye C, Tenorio F, Redoña E, Morales-Cortezano P, Cabrega G, Jagadish K, Gregorio G (2015a)  
    Fine-mapping and validating qHTSF4.1 to increase spikelet fertility under heat stress at flower- 
    ing in rice. Theor Appl Genet 128:1507–1517 
Ye  C,  Tenorio  F, Argayoso  M,  Laza  M,  Koh  H,  Redoña  E,  Jagadish  K,  Gregorio  G  (2015b)  
    Identifying and confirming quantitative trait loci associated with heat tolerance at flowering  
    stage in different rice populations. BMC Genet 16:41 
Yoshida S, Satake T, Mackill D (1981) High temperature stress in rice. IRRI Res Pap Ser 67:1–15 
Zakaria S, Matsuda T, Tajima S, Nitta Y (2002) Effect of high temperature at ripening stage on the  
    reserve accumulation in seed in some rice cultivars. Plant Prod Sci 5:160–168 
Zhang T, Yang L, Jiang K, Huang M, Sun Q, Chen W, Zheng J (2008) QTL mapping for heat toler- 
    ance of the tassel period of rice. Mol Plant Breed 6:867–873 
Zhang G, Chen L, Xiao G, Xiao Y, Chen X, Zhang S (2009) Bulked segregant analysis to detect  
    QTL related to heat tolerance in rice using SSR markers. Agric Sci China 8:482–487 
Zhao Z, Zhang L, Xiao Y, Zhang W, Zhai H, Wan J (2006) Identification of QTLs for heat tolerance  
    at the booting stage in rice. Acta Agron Sin 32:640–644 
Zhong L, Cheng F, Wen X, Sun X, Zhang G (2005) The deterioration of eating and cooking quality  
    caused by high temperature during grain filling in early-season indica rice cultivars. J Agron  
    Crop Sci 191:218–225 
Zhou Y, Gong H, Li C, Hu C, Lin T, Sheng S (2009) Influence of thermal damage on seed-setting  
    rate of 67 indica hybrid rice combinations. Acta Agric Jiangxi 21:23–26 
Zhu C, Xiao Y, Wang C, Jiang L, Zhai H, Wan J (2005) Mapping QTLs for heat tolerance during  
    grain filling in rice. Chin J Rice Sci 19:117–121 
Ziska LH, Manalo PA, Ordonez R (1996) Intraspecific variation in the response of rice (Oryza  
    sativa L.) to increased CO2 and temperature: growth and yield response of 17 cultivars. J Exp  
    Bot 47:1353–1359 

Open Access      This chapter is licensed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution 4.0  
International License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/), which permits use, sharing,  
adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give appropriate  
credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons license and  
indicate if changes were made. 
    The images or other third party material in this chapter are included in the chapter's Creative  
Commons license, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not  
included in the chapter's Creative Commons license and your intended use is not permitted by  
statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from  
the copyright holder. 

----------------------- Page 232-----------------------

Genetics and Breeding of Low-Temperature Stress Tolerance in Rice 

Sofi Najeeb, Anumalla Mahender, Annamalai Anandan, Waseem Hussain,  
Zhikang Li, and Jauhar Ali 

Abstract  Low-temperature stress (LTS) is one of the major abiotic stresses that  
affect crop growth and ultimately decrease grain yield. The development of rice  
varieties with low-temperature stress tolerance has been a severe challenge for rice  
breeders for a long time. The lack of consistency of the quantitative trait loci (QTLs)  
governing LTS tolerance for any given growth stage over different genetic back- 
grounds of mapping populations under different low-temperature stress conditions  
remains  a  crucial  barrier  for  adopting  marker-assisted  selection  (MAS).  In  this  
review, we discuss the ideal location and phenotyping for agromorphological and  
physiological parameters as indicators for LTS tolerance and also the traits associ- 
ated  with  QTLs  that  were  identified  from  biparental  mapping  populations  and  
diverse  rice  accessions. We  highlight  the  progress  made  in  the  fields  of  genome  
editing, genetic transformation, transcriptomics, and metabolomics to elucidate the  
molecular mechanisms of cold tolerance in rice. The stage-specific QTLs and can- 
didate genes for LTS tolerance brought out valuable information toward identifying  
and improving LTS tolerance in rice varieties. We showed 578 QTLs and 38 func- 
tionally  characterized  genes  involved  in  LTS  tolerance. Among  these,  29  QTLs  

Authors  Sofi  Najeeb,  Anumalla  Mahender,  and  Annamalai  Anandan  contributed  equally  to  
this work. 

S. Najeeb  
Rice Breeding Innovation Platform, International Rice Research Institute (IRRI),   
Los Baños, Laguna, Philippines  

Mountain Research Centre for Field Crops, Khudwani, Sher-e-Kashmir University of  
Agricultural Science and Technology (SKAUST), Kashmir, India  

A. Mahender · W. Hussain · J. Ali (*)  
Rice Breeding Innovation Platform, International Rice Research Institute (IRRI),   
Los Baños, Laguna, Philippines 
e-mail: J.Ali@irri.org  

A. Anandan  
Plant Breeding and Genetics Division, ICAR-National Rice Research Institute (NRRI),  
Cuttack, Odisha, India  

Z. Li  
Institute of Crop Sciences/National Key Facility for Crop Gene Resources and Genetic  
Improvement, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences (CAAS), Beijing, P. R. China  

© The Author(s) 2021                                                                               221 
J. Ali, S. H. Wani (eds.), Rice Improvement,  
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-66530-2_8 

----------------------- Page 233-----------------------

222                                                                               S. Najeeb et al. 

were found to be colocalized at different growth stages of rice. The combination of  
stage-specific QTLs and genes from biparental mapping populations and genome-  
wide association studies provide potential information for developing LTS-tolerant  
rice varieties. The identified colocalized stage-specific LTS-tolerance QTLs will be  
useful for MAS and QTL pyramiding and for accelerating mapping and cloning of  
the possible candidate genes, revealing the underlying LTS-tolerance mechanisms  
in rice. 

Keywords  Low-temperature stress · Physiological indicators · Stage-specific  
QTLs and genes · Breeding strategies · Genetic transformation 

1     Introduction 

Rice (Oryza sativa L.) is an important cereal crop, being the staple food for more  
than  half  of  the  world’s  population,  providing  21%  of  global  human  per  capita  
energy  (Nalley  et  al.  2017).  Approximately  one  tenth  of  Earth’s  arable  land  is  
planted to rice, which is the primary source of food. The demand for this staple crop  
has put more pressure on rice breeders and biotechnologists to intensify rice pro- 
duction systems to enhance yield productivity under drastic changes in global cli- 
matic variations (GCVs). Based on the projection of global population growth, rice  
production must increase its annual yield by 1.2–1.5% in the coming decades to  
ensure global food security (Seck et al. 2012). 
    Rice is grown globally in diverse ecosystems, ranging from a few meters below  
sea level to as high as 2700 m above mean sea level (amsl). Despite rice originating  
in the swampy areas of the tropics, it is susceptible to a wide range of abiotic stresses  
(Ranawake and Nakamura 2011). Changes in GCVs have shifted the distribution of  
temperature variability across the globe. These remarkable shifts have resulted in  
more frequent low-temperature stress/cold stress events (chilling stress and freezing  
stress)  during  the  rice-growing  season,  especially  in  subtropical  and  temperate  
regions, with consequent adverse effects on rice production. Low-temperature stress  
(LTS) is one of the major abiotic stresses that significantly decrease rice grain yield  
and is experienced by 10% of the total 130 million ha of rice (Mohanty et al. 2012).  
For instance, rice farmers have suffered significant declines in grain yield ranging  
from 0.5 to 2.5 t/ha in Australia, with an average yield income loss of USD 23.2 mil- 
lion/year because of LTS (Farrell et al. 2001). 
    Low temperature affects the rice industry in Africa, Asia, Australia, Europe, and  
South and North America. In the mountainous regions of South Korea, extremely  
low temperatures severely damaged rice crops in 1980 and 1993, with grain yield  
dropping  by  26.0%  and  9.2%,  respectively,  compared  with  the  national  average  
yield during those years (Schiller et al. 2001). Also, severe grain yield losses due to  
LTS conditions were reported in Italy, the United States (Board et al.  1980), and  
Chile. In India, LTS occurs in about 60% of the rice area in the northeastern and  

----------------------- Page 234-----------------------

Genetics and Breeding of Low-Temperature Stress Tolerance in Rice                        223 

western hill states of the Himalayas, with cold stress caused by the cold irrigation  
water from melted snow and low ambient air temperature. LTS also directly affects  
crop duration, which increases relatively with cold temperature, thereby limiting to  
a large extent the possibility of double cropping in areas where water control is pos- 
sible (Matlon et al. 1998). 
   Rice cultivars vary prominently in their tolerance of LTS, with subspecies indica  
more sensitive to LTS, while japonica  cultivars are known to tolerate cold stress  
(Kim  and  Tai  2013).  The  rice  crop  is  relatively  sensitive  to  temperatures  below  
15  °C,  which  causes  varying  effects  across  different  crop  growth  stages  such  as  
germination,  seedling,  vegetative,  reproductive,  and  grain  maturity  (Andaya  and  
Mackill 2003a, b). Low temperatures directly affect the crop by causing slow growth  
and decreased seedling vigor (Ali et al. 2006) as well as a delayed and lower per- 
centage of germination (da Cruz and Milach 2000). At the seedling stage, manifes- 
tations of cold stress include low numbers of seedlings, decreased tillering, increased  
plant mortality, and induced nonuniform crop maturity (Zhang et al. 2014b). At the  
vegetative stage, LTS increases the growth period as exhibited by leaf discoloration  
or yellowing, leaf rolling or wilting, slowed growth, poor germination and seedling  
establishment, and the presence of rotten and dead seedlings (Lone et al.  2018).  
During  flowering,  the  most  sensitive  stage,  low  temperature  brings  anomalies  at  
anthesis, resulting in the cessation of anther development, nonripening of pollen,  
nonemergence of anthers from spikelets, improper anther dehiscence, pollen grains  
remaining in anther loculi, poor pollen shedding, and failure of pollen to germinate  
after reaching the stigmas (Suh et al. 2010; Shakiba et al. 2017). 
   LTS in both temperate and high-altitude rice-growing areas in the tropics and  
subtropics  causes  damaging  effects  throughout  the  growth  dynamics  of  the  crop  
(Ranawake and Nakamura 2015). The effect of LTS on different plant growth stages  
(germination, seedling, and reproductive) is crucial. In addition, there is a need for  
identifying an ideal location for phenotypic screening under LTS conditions, espe- 
cially for agronomic, physiological, and biochemical traits to help in the develop- 
ment of LTS-tolerant cultivars. The establishment of genetic and genomic resources  
for LTS tolerance is a vital step toward the development of LTS-tolerant varieties.  
Over the years, the genetic and physiological perspectives of cold tolerance have  
been extensively studied, giving way to the development of a diverse set of criteria  
for evaluating the cold-tolerance phenomenon in rice at different growth stages. The  
rapid development of molecular markers and next-generation sequencing technol- 
ogy tools such as bisulfite sequencing and whole-transcriptome shotgun sequencing  
have been accelerated in many crop plants (Fig.  1). Several genomic regions have  
been studied for LTS in rice using biparental mapping populations and association  
mapping procedures. In this review, we have tried to organize and discuss the stage-  
specific QTLs and candidate genes for LTS tolerance, which could be used in LTS-  
tolerance rice varietal improvement programs. We also provide here the phenotypic  
characterization of LTS-tolerance traits at different growth stages of rice and associ- 
ated genomic regions from the literature along with the traits. We also cover genome  
editing, genetic transformation, transcriptomics, and metabolomics tools for eluci- 
dating the molecular mechanisms of LTS tolerance in rice. 

----------------------- Page 235-----------------------

224                                                                               S. Najeeb et al. 

2     Phenological, Physiological, and Biochemical Indicators  
     of LTS Tolerance at Different Developmental Stages 

Screening for LTS in rice can be done at various growth stages (Table  1). In con- 
trolled conditions, LTS screening can be achieved timely with precision; however, it  
restricts the population in both sample size and number of samples. Thus, to screen  
large-sized populations, LTS breeding programs have resorted to evaluating many  
populations using cold water under field conditions (Snell et al. 2008). Such cold-  
water screening under field conditions has been established in research stations in  
Japan (Nagano  1998) and Korea (Lee 2001). The air temperature thresholds at the  
reproductive stage for cold-sensitive and cold-tolerant varieties are 20 °C and 15 °C,  
respectively (Satake 1976). Hence, high-elevation areas with low air and water tem- 
peratures, especially in subtropical regions in Kunming, People’s Republic of China  
(subsequently “China”), and in regions of Kashmir and Himachal Pradesh, India,  
are ideal spots for screening for cold tolerance (Jiang et al.  2012). Natural cold-  
screening hotspots that represent the target population of environments are vital for  
the  systematic  screening  of  germplasm  and  segregating  breeding  materials.  The  
selection  of  such  hotspots  is  crucial  for  the  success  of  breeding  and  molecular  
genetic studies. 
    Rice is quite sensitive to LTS, mainly in tropical and subtropical regions at dif- 
ferent growth stages. The critical temperature of the germination and reproductive  
stage at 15 and 17 °C has shown a significant impact on growth stage and yield  
decrease. However, the optimum temperature required for rice cultivation ranges  
from 25 to 35 °C (Yoshida 1981). The selection of LTS-tolerant rice varieties with a  
short duration is the key requirement for decreasing LTS damage. The effects of  
LTS in different growth stages, such as germination stage (GS), seedling stage (SS),  
and reproductive stage (RS), have significant impacts on agromorphological changes  
and yield component losses, especially in tropical zones. As compared to indica or  
indica × japonica  backgrounds, japonica  rice varieties have shown a wide range of  
LTS tolerance (da Cruz et al.  2013). The list of some LTS-tolerant rice varieties  
provided in Table 2 spans different countries, and most of these varieties are japon- 
ica type. However, some  indica rice varieties also showed considerable LTS toler- 
ance at the GS or SS (Biswas et al. 2017). 
    A few varieties have been proven to have a better performance for LTS in stage-  
specific growth conditions: for instance, Jinheung, Nipponbare, RNR 18805, and  
Italica Livorno for the GS (Miura et al. 2001; Fujino et al. 2004); M202, Lemont,  
and AAV002863  for  the  SS  (Andaya  and  Mackill  2003b;  Lou  et  al.  2007);  and  
Norin PL8, Kirara397, RNR 17813, Akshaydhan, Taramati, WGL 44, Bhadrakali,  
JGL 3844, and WGL 44 for the RS (Saito et al. 2001; Kuroki et al. 2009). However,  
four rice varieties, B55, Banjiemang, Lijiangheig, and HSC55 from China and the  
United States, showed a consistent tolerance in three different growth stages (GS,  
SS, and RS) in rice (Basuchaudhuri 2014). For a further selection of LTS-tolerant  
rice varieties, several screening methods have been proposed, along with their pros  
and  cons,  for  LTS-tolerant  genotypes  (Almeida  et  al.  2016).  The  selection  of  

----------------------- Page 236-----------------------

Genetics and Breeding of Low-Temperature Stress Tolerance in Rice                                               225 

        Rice germplasm                       Traits                 Advanced genomic technologies                C 
                                   Agro-morphological traits                                                     O 
                                                                                                                 L 
                                                                                                                 D 
                                                                                         Gene cloning 
                       Landraces                                                          and editing 
                                                                H 
                                                                                                                  T 
                                                                I 
                                                                G                                                O 
                                                                H 
                                                                - 
                                                                T                                                L 
                                                                H 
                                                                R 
                                                                                       In silico tools 
                                                                O 
                                                                                                                 E 
                     Wild species 
                                                                U   T 
                                                                G      M 
                                                                                                                 R 
                                                                    R 
                                                                                         QTL discovery 
                                                                H   A  E   E   P 
                                                                P   N  T   P   R        Gene annotation          A 
                                                                           I 
                                                                U   S  A   G   O 
                                                                T   C  B   E   T       Haplotype analysis        N 
                                                                G   R  O   N   E 
                                                                               O 
                       Mapping                                                        Association mapping 
                                                                E   I  L   O 
                                                                    P          M 
                                                                                                                  T 
                     populations                                N   T  O   M   I   Use gene expression profiling 
                                                                O   O  M   I   C 
                                                                M   M  I   C   S  and Identifying candidate gene 
                                                                       C   S     
                                                                E   I  S 
                                                                    C 
                                                                                                                 G 
                                                                         
                                                                S   S 
                                                                E     
                                                                Q 
                                                                                                                 E 
                     Pre-breeding                               U                  Functional marker development 
                                                                E 
                                                                                                                 N 
                                                                N 
                                                                C 
                         lines                                                                                   O 
                                                                I 
                                                                N                       Introgression 
                                                                G 
                                                                                                                  T 
                                                                                                                 Y 
                        Mutants                                                      Marker-assisted selection    P 
                                                                                   Marker-assisted backcrossing  E 
                                                                                        Genomic selection 
                                                                                                                  S 

                                    Physio-biochemical traits 

Fig. 1   Integration of high-throughput molecular approaches and phenotypic techniques to develop  
stage-specific desirable cold-tolerant rice genotypes 

promising rice genotypes under natural LTS might favor negative results because of  
unpredictable  climatic  alterations  in  terms  of  stress  intensity  and  duration  of  
LTS. However, using high-throughput screening techniques such as image analysis,  
yield trait score, and robotics in controlled conditions of temperature, water, and air  
might help to detect tolerant genotypes and could also elucidate the traits related to  
morphological,  biochemical,  and  yield-attributed  traits  during  the  plant  growth  
period (Yang et al. 2014). Earlier studies of Snell et al. (2008), Suh et al. (2010), and  
Khatun  et  al.  (2016)  mentioned  having  developed  reliable  and  straightforward  
screening methodologies for the selection of LTS-tolerant rice genotypes by prepar- 
ing specific tanks for imposing cold-water irrigation and using a phytotron cabinet  
and low temperature in the glasshouse at different growth stages, which can provide  
the critical component traits. The primary focus traits for the GS related to germina- 
tion rate, germination index, coefficient of germination, coleoptile length, and radi- 
cle length and also associated with early seedling vigor could be important traits for  
the selection of LTS tolerance at the GS (Li et al. 2018). In the SS, leaf discolor- 
ation, seedling survivability, leaf chlorophyll content, and estimation of the concen- 
tration of osmoprotectants (spermine and glycine betaine) and trehalose accumulation  
could be useful indicators to detect LTS at the SS (Han et al. 2004; Lou et al. 2007;  
Suh et al. 2012). Similarly, seed-setting rate, pollen growth development, incom- 
plete panicle exsertion, days to flowering, spikelet fertility, and grain yield are the  
key traits for selection criteria at the RS (Ye et al. 2009; Jena et al. 2012; da Cruz  
et al.  2013). However, the natural incidence of LTS is significantly influenced to  
alter   tolerance   trait   expression   during   phenotypic   evaluation.   Therefore,   a  

----------------------- Page 237-----------------------

226                                                                                      S. Najeeb et al. 

Table 1   Criteria for evaluating LTS tolerance at different growth stages in rice 

                                            Applied  
                                            temperature/ 
 Stage            Trait studied             duration              Stage of study       References 
 Germination      Germination               14 °C (7–17 days)     Incubation of        Han et al. (2006) 
                  vigor = number of                                seed to  
                  germinated grains/                              germination up  
                  total grains                                    to 17 days 
                  Seedling survival         2 °C for 3 days       Germination to       Zhou et al.  
                  rate = (number of                               very early           (2012) 
                  surviving seedlings/                             seedling stage 
                  sprouted seeds) × 100 
                  Coleoptile length         15 °C for 10 days     Germination to       Hou et al. (2003) 
                                                                  very early  
                                                                   seedling stage 
                  Germination rate          15 °C for 10 days     Germination to       Chen et al.  
                                                                  very early           (2006b) 
                                                                   seedling stage 
                  Germination rate          5 °C for 10 days      Seedling             Pan et al. (2015) 
                                                                   survival rate  
                                                                  (SSR) 
                  Germination               10 °C for 30 days     Seedling stage       Schläppi et al.  
                  percentage                                                           (2017) 
                  Germination               12 °C for 35 days     Dark, cold           Shakiba et al.  
                  percentage                                      incubator set for    (2017) 
                                                                  35 days 
 Vegetative/      Changes in fresh          10 °C for 1–48 h       13 days after       Bonnecarrère  
 seedling         weight after cold                               germination          et al. (2011) 
                  treatment 
                  Number of surviving       4 °C for 6 days       –                    Zhang et al.  
                  plants/total number                                                  (2011) 
                  Survival rate after       10 °C for 3, 6, and   –                    Bertin et al.  
                  10 days of recovery       9 days                                     (1996) 
                  Survival rate after       4 °C for 6 days in    –                    Koseki et al.  
                  14 days of recovery       dark                                       (2010) 
                  Seedling growth           9 °C for              3-leaf stage         Andaya and  
                  (visual scale: 1–9)       8–18 days                                  Mackill (2003a,  
                                                                                       b), Kim and Tai  
                                                                                       (2011) 
                  Seedling growth           8 °C for 3 days       3-leaf stage         Wang et al.  
                  (visual scale: 1–9)                                                  (2016) 

                                                                                             (continued) 

----------------------- Page 238-----------------------

Genetics and Breeding of Low-Temperature Stress Tolerance in Rice                                  227 

Table 1   (continued) 

                                           Applied  
                                           temperature/ 
 Stage            Trait studied            duration              Stage of study     References 
 Reproductive    Fertility/spikelet        12 °C for 6 days      Flowering/          Sato et al. (2011) 
 stage            fertility percentage     and then in           booting stage 
                                           greenhouse  
                                           conditions up to  
                                           maturity 
                 Fertility/spikelet        18–19 °C/cold         2 months from       Shirasawa et al.  
                  fertility percentage     deep irrigation       panicle initiation  (2012) 
                                           water                 to full heading  
                                                                 stage 
                 Fertility/spikelet        17 °C water/air       20 DAT from         Suh et al. (2010),  
                  fertility percentage     temperature for       tillering to grain  Jena et al. (2012) 
                                           10 days; irrigation   maturity 
                                           water at 17 °C 
                 Fertility/spikelet        17 °C for 7 days      Flowering/         da Cruz et al.  
                  fertility percentage     at anthesis stage     booting stage       (2006a) 
                 Fertility/spikelet        15.3–21.4 °C of       Booting to         Zhu et al. (2015) 
                 fertility percentage      air temperature at    milking stage 
                                           booting stage 
                 Percent panicle           Night-time            Dark, cold          Shakiba et al.  
                  sterility, number of     temperature of        incubator set for   (2017) 
                 panicles per plant, and   12 °C and daytime  35 days 
                  seed weight per plant    temperature of  
                                           27.3 °C 
                 Relative seed-setting     15–19 °C              Booting stage      Pan et al. (2015) 
                 rate 

combination of advanced molecular marker technology and high-throughput screen- 
ing  technologies  provides  the  best  method  for  prospecting  for  LTS-tolerant  
genotypes. 
    Several protocols exist to screen for cold tolerance/sensitivity in rice using dif- 
ferent physiological and biochemical indicators. Two good indices of cold tolerance  
are seedling survival percentage (SSP) after subjecting seedlings to different low-  
temperature regimes (Morsy et al. 2007) and seedling chlorosis (Nagamine  1991).  
Many researchers have used SSP to analyze the resistance of transgenic plants to  
low temperatures (Chen et al. 2012; Huang et al. 2012). Nevertheless, the drawback  
of information obtained from SSP is that it is neither reproducible under natural  
conditions nor feasible for QTL studies. On the other hand, seedling chlorosis or the  
decrease in chlorophyll and leaf yellowing induced by cold stress could be captured  
by  Soil  Plant Analysis  Development  (SPAD)  values  to  provide  a  more  accurate  
measurement of cold stress at the seedling stage over a visual score. This indicator  
gives the direct association of the photosynthetic activity of the leaves, with low-  
temperature intensity and duration, as one of the yardsticks to screen rice germ- 
plasm and populations against cold stress (Hussain et al. 2018). 

----------------------- Page 239-----------------------

228                                                                                      S. Najeeb et al. 

Table 2   List of popular LTS-tolerant rice varieties released in several countries 

 Rice varieties                             Country       Remarks                       References 
 K39, K78 (Barkat), K332, Kohsar,           India         Popularly grown in            Gupta et al.  
 Jhelum, Shalimar Rice 1, Shalimar                        Kashmir valley and high       (2009) 
 Rice 2, Shalimar Rice 3, a few                           hills of Himachal  
 varieties of VL Dhan series,                             Pradesh, possessing a  
 Himalaya 1, Kanchan, Himali, and                         good degree of cold  
 Bhrigu Dhan                                              tolerance 
 Yunlu 29, B55, Lijianghegu, and            China         Considerable cold             Sivapalan  
 Banjiemang                                               tolerance and remarkable      (2013) 
 Viet                                       Vietnam       recovery from cold  
                                                          damage 
 Jyoudeki and Tachiminori                   Japan         Significant tolerance at      Ye et al. (2009) 
 M103 and M104                              U.S.          booting/flowering stage,  
                                                          whereas HSC55 shows  
 HSC55                                      Hungary 
                                                          considerable tolerance at  
 Quest                                      Australia 
                                                          all stages 
 Ambar-INIA, Quila 242002, and              Chile         Show considerable cold        Donoso et al.  
 Quila 241304                                             tolerance at seedling         (2015) 
                                                          stage 
 Doongara, Illabong, and Langi              Australia     Possess significant cold      Sivapalan  
                                                          tolerance                     (2013) 
 Jinbubyeo, Junganbyeo, and                 Korea         Show strong cold              Wang et al.  
 SR30084-F8-156                                           tolerance at booting stage    (2013b) 
 PR27137-CR153, Khazar, Hasani,             Iran          Possess cold tolerance at     Pouramir  
 and Gil2                                                 germination stage             Dashtmian  
                                                                                        et al. (2013) 
 L2825CA                                    Uruguay       Germination-stage             Bonnecarrere  
                                                          cold-tolerant japonica        et al. (2015) 
                                                          line 
 Avangard and Mustaqillik                   Uzbekistan    Possess flowering-stage       Suh et al.  
 Jinbu and Jungan                           Korea         cold tolerance                (2010), Jena  
                                                                                        et al. (2012) 
 Giza 177                                   Egypt 

    The accumulation of more dry matter and the functionality of photosystem-II  
(PSII) provide quantitative information on plant performance under cold-stress con- 
ditions (Gururani et al. 2015). An increase in the efficiency of PSII photochemistry  
gives information on the structural and functional changes in the photosystem of  
different plant types or transgenics, especially when the seedlings are exposed to  
low temperatures (Bonnecarrère et al. 2011). A sudden drop in chlorophyll integrity  
parameter and chlorophyll fluorescence (Fv/Fm) indicates a gas exchange decrease  
caused by alterations in the photosynthetic system. Therefore, combined informa- 
tion on gas exchange analysis and chlorophyll fluorescence is necessary to study the  
photosynthetic process (Saad et al. 2012) under cold stress. The expression of the  
AISAP gene of Aeluropus littoralis in rice confers broad tolerance of several abiotic  
stresses through the maintenance of photosynthetic apparatus integrity (Saad et al.  
2012),  particularly  for  PSII.  The  AISAP  gene  has  become  the  tool  to  precisely  

----------------------- Page 240-----------------------

Genetics and Breeding of Low-Temperature Stress Tolerance in Rice                         229 

evaluate for cold tolerance as it is related to final photosynthetic activity (da Cruz  
et al. 2013). 
   Biochemical  parameters  such  as  electrolyte  leakage  (EL),  proline  (Pro),  and  
ascorbic acid (AA) were reported to be higher in sensitive variety IR50 than in resis- 
tant cultivar M202 (Kim and Tai 2011). Lee et al. (1993) showed that the exogenous  
application of abscisic acid (ABA) biosynthetic inhibitors resulted in low accumula- 
tion and low survival of seedlings under cold stress. Breeding varieties that accumu- 
late higher concentrations of osmoprotectants (spermine and glycine betaine) was  
seen to be a strategy to overcome stresses (Yang et al. 1996), which has been proven  
through the development of transgenic rice that accumulates higher glycine betaine  
and shows resistance to LTS (Sakamoto and Murata 2002). Furthermore, the signifi- 
cant induction in the expression of antioxidative enzymes such as catalase (CAT),  
superoxide dismutase (SOD), and ascorbate peroxidase (APEX) under cold stress  
(Kuk et al. 2003) explained the rate of cold tolerance (Morsy et al. 2007) by RNA  
interference (RNAi) (Song et al. 2011) and in transgenic rice encoding Cu/Zn super- 
oxide dismutase (sodC1) (Lee et al. 2009a, b). 
   The high tolerance of rice of cold stress could also be attributed to trehalose  
accumulation  (Ge  et  al.  2008).  Song  et  al.  (2011)  also  found  that  accumulated  
amounts of trehalose can be used as an index for low-temperature tolerance/sensi- 
tivity. Increased amounts of trehalose through the overexpression of the  OsNAC5  
gene in transgenic rice plants were found to result in improved PSII function under  
abiotic stress conditions as it restricted damage due to photooxidation and exhibited  
soluble carbohydrates 20% higher than in nontransgenic plants (Garg et al. 2002).  
Similarly, at the reproductive stage, no sugar (sucrose and hexoses) accumulation  
has been found in anthers of low temperature-tolerant lines, resulting in no pollen  
grain sterility (Oliver et al. 2007). The overexpression of the gene OsAPXa (ascor- 
bate peroxidase) in transgenic rice lines resulted in increased fertility under cold  
stress (Sato et al.  2011). It is also reported that unsaturated fatty acid content is  
related  to  plasma  membrane  stability  at  cold  temperatures  during  the  vegetative  
stage. Tolerant genotypes exhibited an increase in the amount of linolenic acid and  
a  decrease  in  palmitic  acid  (da  Cruz  et  al.  2010).  Therefore,  lipid  peroxidation  
(Zhang et al. 2012a), along with EL (Huang et al. 2012), can be used to evaluate  
membrane lipid damage, which is an indirect assessment of cold tolerance. 
   Below the soil surface, roots play a crucial role under chilling stress, and root  
hydraulic conductivity (Lpr) is found to be profoundly affected when the plants are  
exposed to cold stress (Yamori et al. 2010). Murai-Hatano et al. (2008) found that  
Lpr decreased when susceptible rice genotypes were exposed to a temperature of  
15 °C and the decrease was linked to transmembrane proteins, such as the aquapo- 
rins. These physiological and biochemical methods used for evaluating stress in rice  
genotypes and transgenic rice plants have played a significant role in understanding  
the crop’s mechanism of response against cold. However, most of these procedures  
are  destructive,  time-consuming,  and  stage-specific  and  are  also  inadequate  and  
inappropriate for breeding programs involving the evaluation of many lines with  
large sample sizes. Therefore, to better understand cold-tolerance mechanisms, it is  
indispensable to study the phenomenon at the molecular level. 

----------------------- Page 241-----------------------

230                                                                               S. Najeeb et al. 

    To improve the tolerance of rice of LTS, it is imperative to understand it at  
the molecular and physiological levels. At changing temperatures, rice plants  
modify their biological pathways, and molecular alterations occur within a dif- 
ferent  growth  stage  (Xiao  et  al.  2018;  Ding  et  al.  2019). At  different  growth  
stages of rice plants, the initial effects of LTS are a decline in plasma membrane  
fluidity and transportation mechanism and alterations in physiological and met- 
abolic  activities,  leading  to  disturbance  of  signaling  processes  (Ding  et  al.  
2019). The cascades of the signaling process were followed by adjusting their  
cellular metabolism by activating the plasma membrane transporters and alter- 
ing the metabolic responses (Fig. 2). These changes occurred in the intracellular  
levels  by  increasing  abscisic  acid  concentrations  via  changes  in  growth  hor- 
mones such as auxin and gibberellins and cross talk between the ethylene and  
salicylic acid signaling mechanism (Ghosh et al. 2016; Moraes De Freitas et al.  
2016).  These  mechanisms  have  occurred  through  an  alteration  of  membrane  
fluidity  and  the  rearrangement  of  the  cytoskeleton  by  the  influx  of  calcium,  
which can trigger a downstream response to LTS tolerance by C-repeat binding  
factor:  CBF-dependent  (C-repeat/drought-responsive  element-binding  factor-  
dependent) and CBF-independent transcriptional pathways (Chinnusamy et al.  
2010; Ma et al. 2015). Different growth stage-specific LTS-tolerance genes can  
be  classified  into  three  major  groups  as  transcription  factors,  protein  kinase  
genes, and functional genes, which may be involved in signal transduction path- 
ways.  Mainly,  the  CBF  transcription  factor  regulates  cold-responsive  gene  
(COR) expression by binding to the CRT/DRE element. The promoter sequence  
of  the  CBF  region  is  activated  by  the  bHLH  transcriptional  activator  of  the  
inducer of CBF expression (ICE), which can also induce the expression of CBF  
genes toward LTS tolerance (Ito et al. 2006; Su et al. 2010). In addition to CBF  
pathway-related  transcription  factors,  two  genes,  FRO1  (FROSTBITE  1)  and  
OsFAD2, encode ferric reduction oxidase 1 and fatty acid desaturase 2, which  
are involved in LTS-tolerance mechanisms by maintaining membrane fluidity  
(Bevilacqua et al. 2015). The influx of calcium signals has also been associated  
with  nitric  oxide,  reactive  oxygen  species,  and  mitogen-activated  protein  
kinases, which can trigger the cascades of signaling pathways leading to LTS  
tolerance (Yuan et al. 2018). LTS tolerance at the germination stage is an impor- 
tant component trait for rapid seedling growth and uniform crop establishment,  
especially in the direct-seeding production system. The overexpression of the  
zeta class of glutathione S-transferases (OsGSTZ1) significantly improved ger- 
mination rate and seedling growth under LTS (Takesawa et al. 2002). Similarly,  
Jin et al. (2018) identified a novel zinc finger transcription factor (OsCTZFP8)  
and it plays a key role in LTS tolerance at the reproductive stage in pollen fertil- 
ity and seed setting along with yield per plant. Therefore, studying LTS- tolerance  
mechanisms at specific growth stages is crucial and may provide a better under- 
stating of key gene functions and their role in developing LTS-tolerant rice vari- 
eties in future breeding programs. 

----------------------- Page 242-----------------------

Genetics and Breeding of Low-Temperature Stress Tolerance in Rice                                                    231 

                                                                                                  Plasma membrane 

                Signal sensor receptors  
  Ion channels       Inositol polyphosphates     Histidine kinase        Receptor-like kinase            G-protein coupled receptor 

            ABA                                          Ca+2                ROS                    GA 
      1                ZEP and  
                        NCED                                             SG              GA20ox3            6 
     ABRE                                        CDPKs                                   GA3ox1         PS 
                            2                3                          5   MAPKKK,  
                                                                            MAPK, and  
                                       OsMYB3R 
                                                                              MAPK              (GA  , and GA )  
   OsSNAC1-5       C-8 hydroxylation              OsCPT1                                            4       7 
                                                         4 
                      pathways      DREB2A     OsMYBS3      DREB1/CBF                                    Reduced sugar  
     NACRS                                                           OsMKK10-2        OsTrx23              transport 
                     ABA8ox1,              CC, LG                          OsMKK4                PD 
                                                                              OsMKK6       GA interacts with GID1+DELLA 
                      ABA8ox2 
                                                                                                          ABI3 and  
              SC, LP,                                                                                              GM 
                                          DREB/CRT                                                          ABI5 
             MS, RWC 
                           PS 
                                                                                                 SOMNUS (SOM) 

                             Activation/expression  of stress inducible genes (RD22/RD29B/ERD1/RD29A) 

                                                              Nucleus 

                                                                      mRNA 

                                                      Tolerance of LTS 

Fig. 2   Sequential steps involved in the triggering of the signaling cascades for low-temperature  
stress (LTS) tolerance. Schematic representations of the LTS signal mostly processed by various  
biological processes such as stress perceptions and physiological and molecular responses. (1) LTS  
signaling initiated by ABA accumulation, and this is transduced to ABRE-containing NAC genes,  
which regulate the expression of NACRS genes for tolerance of LTS (Hu et al.  2008). (2) The  
higher concentration of ABA-induced pollen sterility occurs by increasing the expression of ABA  
biosynthetic genes OsZFP1 and OSNCED3 that convert zeaxanthin to xanthoxin. The LTS-tolerant  
plants were followed by ABA catabolism with a higher expression of two ABA-8-hydroxylase  
genes and further reduced to ABA concentration in anthers via C-8 hydroxylation pathways (Ji  
et al. 2011; Sharma and Nayyar 2016). (3) Increasing the influx of Ca2+ signals mediated by the  

DREB-CRT/DRE pathway under LTS, which is transduced by calcium-dependent protein kinases  
(CDPKs), and MYB family transcription factors induce the stress-responsive genes. OsMYB3R-2  
regulates the LTS-tolerance mechanism at the seedling stage.  OsMYB3R-2 may regulate through  
OsCPT1, which is involved in the DREB/CBF pathway in rice (Su et al. 2010). (4) MYBS3 is a  
single DNA-binding repeat MYB transcription factor, which mediates sugar signaling and also  
tolerance of the LTS signaling pathway. Interestingly, MYBS3 has a distinct tolerance mechanism  
with short- and long-term adaptation of LTS tolerance by repressing the DREB1/CBF pathway and  
late and slow response to LTS tolerance. (5) The cascades of mitogen-activated protein kinase  
consist of three components (MAPKKK, MAPKK, and MAPK) activated by an excess of reactive  
oxygen species under LTS. Kumar et al. (2008) found that MAP kinases 4 and 6 are strongly regu- 
lated by LTS and salt stress at the seedling stage. Cytosolic thioredoxin (OsTrx23) has a potential  
negative regulator for MAPKs’ activity. (6) LTS can also decrease the endogenous levels of bioac- 
tive gibberellic acid (GA) by the transcriptional repression of two bioactive GA synthesis genes  
(GA20ox3 and  GA3ox1) (Sharma and Nayyar 2016). GAs had cross-talk with other hormones to  
regulate  the  stress-response  mechanism.  The  signal  cascades  of  GA  interact  with  the  receptor  
GID1 (GA INSENSITIVE DWARF1) and GRAS family protein DELLA involved in pollen devel- 
opment. The two TFs (ABI3 and ABI5) bind with DELLA complex proteins, which can promote  
the expression of SOMNUS involved as a negative regulator of seed germination (Serrano-Mislata  
et al. 2017; Li et al. 2018). The cross talk with auxin and jasmonic acid-biosynthetic genes plays a  
major role in favoring germination under LTS. The LTS signaling and regulations of the expression  
of TFs and gene responses are indicated by arrows. Each pathway relates to different traits under  
LTS. These traits are SC stomata closure, LP lipid peroxidation, MS membrane stability, RWC rela- 
tive water content, PS pollen sterility,  CC cell cycle,  LG leaf growth,  SG seedling growth,  GM  
germination, PD pollen development 

----------------------- Page 243-----------------------

232                                                                              S. Najeeb et al. 

3     Genes/QTLs Underlying LTS in Rice Detected by Linkage  
     Mapping and GWAS 

For tolerance of LTS, information on the chromosomal location of QTLs and genes  
is limited in different growth stage-specific traits in rice. We carried out a compre- 
hensive  literature  survey,  including  a  Gramene  database  (http://archive.gramene. 
org) search, and aggregated 578 cold-specific QTLs associated with various growth  
stages, including germination, seedling, and booting or reproductive stages. Among  
these QTLs, 239 (41.3%) were mapped through genome-wide association studies  
(GWAS), while 339 (58.7%) QTLs were identified from different types of biparen- 
tal mapping populations, and detailed information is provided in Table 3. Based on  
the distribution of the reported QTLs on the chromosomes, the highest number of  
QTLs was noticed on chromosome 1 (65), followed by chromosome 7 (60), whereas  
the  lowest  number  of  QTLs  was  noticed  on  chromosome  8  (35)  (Fig.  3a).  
Furthermore, based on the association of these QTLs with growth, stage-specific  
traits were classified into 214 QTLs related to GS, 249 QTLs for SS, and 115 QTLs  
for RS (Fig. 3b). 
    The physical positions of these stage-specific QTLs are depicted in Fig. 4. The  
QTLs  were  classified  as  main-effect  QTLs  (M-QTLs),  based  on  the  phenotypic  
variance  explained  by  each  QTL,  which  was  ≥30%.  Notably,  five  M-QTLs  for  
GS-related traits (including germination rate, germination percentage, and germina- 
tion index) were found on chromosomes 2, 5, and 7 (Xu et al. 2008; Cui et al. 2018);  
15 M-QTLs for SS related to shoot and root growth traits on chromosomes 4, 6, 7,  
8, 11, and 12 (Andaya and Mackill 2003b; Wang et al. 2009; Ranawake et al. 2014;  
Yu et al.  2018); and 13 M-QTLs for RS related to heading time, panicle weight,  
spikelet fertility, and culm length on chromosomes 1, 2, 4, 7, and 10 (Dai et al.  
2004; Kuroki et al. 2009; Wainaina et al. 2018) were identified. A total of 29 QTLs  
were colocalized on all 12 chromosomes except on chromosomes 5 and 12 (Fig. 4  
and  Table  4).  However,  the  colocalized  stage-specific  QTLs  range  from  two  to  
seven. Interestingly, the highest numbers of GS- and SS-specific QTLs were colo- 
calized in the 22.5 Mb genomic region on chromosome 7. Three combinations of  
stage-specific QTLs (GS, SS, and RS) were identified on chromosome 10 in the  
19.1 Mb region (Liu et al. 2013; Pan et al. 2015; Schläppi et al. 2017). 

3.1      Germination Stage 

Seed germination is of paramount interest for breeding varieties suitable for temper- 
ate regions and high-elevation areas, but it is given a lower priority than traits such  
as high yield and grain quality. To date, more than 200 QTLs (98 QTLs were identi- 
fied from biparental mapping populations and 116 QTLs from GWAS) have been  
mapped on the 12 chromosomes (Fig. 3). The phenotypic variance of these QTLs  
ranges  from  3.58%  to  42.29%.  The  M-QTLs  (≥30%  PVE)  for  the  GS  were  

----------------------- Page 244-----------------------

Genetics and Breeding of Low-Temperature Stress Tolerance in Rice                                 233 

Table 3   LTS-tolerance QTLs at different growth stages in rice 

 QTL  
 mapping     Number      PVE                                 Number of lines  
 studies     of QTLs     ranges   Chromosomes         Stage   (accessions/parents)      References 
 RILs         9          10.5–    1, 2, 3, 5, 6, 7, 9,   RS   191 lines (M-202/         Andaya and  
                          16.8    and 12                     IR50)                      Mackill  
                                                                                        (2003a) 
 RILs         15         8.7–     1, 3, 4, 6, 8, 10,  SS      191 lines (M-202/         Andaya and  
                          41.7    11, and 12                 IR50)                      Mackill  
                                                                                        (2003b) 
 F2:3         6          7.2–     6, 8, 11, and 12    SS      151 lines (BR1/Hbj.       Biswas et al.  
                          14.9                               BVI)                       (2017) 
 ILs          3          6.5–     1, 7, and 11        SS     240 lines (Xiushui 09/     Cheng et al.  
                         9.5                                 IR2061)                    (2012) 
 F2           9          5.0–     1, 3, 4, 6, 7, 10,  RS     250 lines                  Dai et al.  
                          37.8    and 12                      (Kunmingxiaobaigu/        (2004) 
                                                             Towada) 
 RILs         12         9.1–     4, 6, and 9         SS     227 lines (Daguan dao/     Wang et al.  
                          37.1                               IR28)                      (2009) 
 BC1F5        2          5.5–     3 and 4             GS      122 lines (Livorno/       Fujino et al.  
                          19.3                               Hayamasari)                (2004) 
 F2:3         12         5.6–     1, 2, 3, 5, 7, 9,   SS     200 lines (Milyang 23/     Han et al.  
                          42.9    11, and 12                 Jileng 1)                  (2004) 
 DHs          5          11.8–    1, 2, 4, 10,        SS      120 lines (TN1/           Ji et al.  
                          21.5    and 11                     Chunjiang 06)              (2010b) 
 RILs         9          4.8–     2, 5, 7, 8, 11,     GS      81 lines (Kinmaze/        Jiang et al.  
                          33.5    and 12                     DV85)                      (2008) 
 RILs         3          9.1–     1, 5, and 6         SS      81 lines (Kinmaze/        Jiang et al.  
                          24.1                               DV85)                      (2008) 
 RILs         6          6.3–     1, 4, 8, and 11     GS      124 lines (Changhui       Jiang et al.  
                          23.3                                891/02428)                (2017) 
 RILs         6          6.1–     1, 2, 4, 10,        SS      123 lines (Jinbu/BR29)    Kim et al.  
                          16.5    and 11                                                (2014) 
 RILs         12         10.5–    1, 2, and 10        RS      114 lines (Kirara397/     Kuroki et al.  
                          47.3                               Hatsushizuku)              (2009) 
 F2           1           26.6    8                   RS     288 lines (Hokkai-PL9/     Kuroki et al.  
                                                             Hokkai287)                 (2007) 
 CSSLs        4           24.3    2, 5, 6, and 10     GS      143 lines (Nipponbare/    Li et al.  
                                                             Zhenshan97)                (2011b) 
 RILs         5          6.8–     7, 9, and 12        GS      181 lines (USSR5/         Li et al.  
                          12.1                               N22)                       (2013) 
 BC1F1        2          –        1                   RS      161 lines                 Li et al.  
                                                              (3037/02428//3037)        (1997) 
 F2           2          16.9–    12                  RS      121 lines (3037/02428)    Li et al.  
                          19.4                                                          (1997) 
 DHs          2          –        3 and 10            GS      193 lines (Zhenshan       Lou et al.  
                                                             97B/AAV002863)             (2007) 

                                                                                          (continued) 

----------------------- Page 245-----------------------

234                                                                                  S. Najeeb et al. 

Table 3   (continued) 

 QTL  
 mapping     Number      PVE                                 Number of lines  
 studies     of QTLs     ranges   Chromosomes        Stage   (accessions/parents)      References 
 ILs          7          8.0–     1, 2, 5, 6, 7,     SS      112 lines (IL112/         Liu et al.  
                         20.0     and 10                     Guichao2)                 (2013) 
 DHs          6          6.4–     1, 2, and 8        SS      193 lines (AAV002863/     Lou et al.  
                         27.4                                Zhenshan 97B)             (2007) 
 BC1F9        5          10.1–    2, 4, 5, and 11    GS      98 lines (Nipponbare/     Miura et al.  
                         14.9                                Kasalath)                 (2001) 
 RILs         2          7.5–     1 and 4            SS      80 lines (Milyang23/      Park et al.  
                         16.0                                Hapcheonaengmi3)          (2013) 
 RILs         4          5.8–     7, 8, and 11       GS      162 lines (HGKN/          Ranawake  
                         9.3                                 Hokuriku-142)             et al. (2014) 
 RILs         9          5.8–     2, 5, 6, 7, 8,     SS      162 lines (HGKN/          Ranawake  
                         35.6     and 11                     Hokuriku-142)             et al. (2014) 
 BC1F5        2          –        4                  RS      117 lines (Kirara397/     Saito et al.  
                                                             Norin-PL8//Kirara397)     (1995) 
 F2           6          10.4–    1 and 3            GS      120 lines                 Satoh et al.  
                         23.0                                (Akitakomachi/            (2016) 
                                                             Maratteli) 
 DHs          2          11.1–    4 and 9            GS      127 lines (ZYQ8/JX17)     Teng et al.  
                         12.6                                                          (2001) 
 BC1F5        3          7.9–     7, 8, and 12       RS      77 lines (Suisei/         Shinada  
                         19.2                                Eikei88223)               et al. (2013) 
 RILs         6          5.8–     3, 7, and 9        RS      153 lines                 Suh et al.  
                         10.9                                (IR66160- 121-4-4-2/      (2010) 
                                                             Geumobyeo) 
 BC1F5        11         3.9–     7                  RS      264 lines (Lijing2/       Sun et al.  
                         8.3                                 Towada)                   (2019) 
 F2           16         3.1–71   1, 3, 4, 6, 7, 8,  RS      108 lines (Hananomai/     Wainaina  
                                  10, and 11                 WAB56-104)                et al. (2018) 
 RILs         2          5.9–     11                 GS      227 lines (Daguan dao/    Wang et al.  
                         8.5                                 IR28)                     (2011) 
 RILs         5          5.5–     3, 8, 11, and 12   SS      227 lines (Daguan dao/    Wang et al.  
                         22.4                                IR28)                     (2011) 
 F2          23          4.1–     3, 4, 5, 7, 9, 10,  GS     517 lines                 Xu et al.  
                         32.7     and 11                     (Kunmingxiaobaigu/        (2008) 
                                                             Towada) 
 F2           10         2.9–     1, 4, 5, and 10    RS      517 lines                 Xu et al.  
                         14.8                                (Kunmingxiaobaigu/        (2008) 
                                                             Towada) 
 F3           7          –        1, 2, 5, 8, and 10 SS      10,800 lines (LPBG/       Z Yang et al.  
                                                             Nipponbare)               (2013b) 
 RILs        27          4.6–     2, 6, 7, 9, 11,    GS      190 lines                 Yang et al.  
                         42.0     and 12                     (Dongnong422/             (2018) 
                                                             Kongyu131) 

                                                                                         (continued) 

----------------------- Page 246-----------------------

Genetics and Breeding of Low-Temperature Stress Tolerance in Rice                                 235 

Table 3   (continued) 

 QTL  
 mapping     Number      PVE                                  Number of lines  
 studies      of QTLs    ranges   Chromosomes         Stage   (accessions/parents)      References 
 RILs         36         4.5–     2, 3, 6, 7, 9, 10,  SS      190 lines                 Yang et al.  
                          35.4    and 11                      (Dongnong422/             (2018) 
                                                              Kongyu131) 
 BILs         5          8.8–     4, 8, and 12        SS      202 lines (XB//XB/        Yu et al.  
                          60.9                                DWR)                      (2018) 
 RILs         15         5.0–     1, 6, 7, 8, 9, 11,  SS      204 lines (LTH/SHZ-2)     Zhang et al.  
                          23.1    and 12                                                (2014c) 
 RILs         5          5.5–     3, 7, and 11        SS      269 lines (Lemont/        Zhi-Hong  
                          29.8                                Teqing)                   et al. (2005) 
 GWAS         17         5.2–     2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 8, 9,  GS    174 Chinese rice          Pan et al.  
                          59.2    10, 11, and 12              accessions                (2015) 
 GWAS         33         5.2–     1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7,   RS   174 Chinese rice          Pan et al.  
                          59.2    8, 10, and 12               accessions                (2015) 
 GWAS         67         3.8–     1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7,   SS   295 Rice diversity        Wang et al.  
                         8.2      8, 9, 10, and 11           panel                      (2016) 
 GWAS        45          3.5–     1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7,   GS   202 Rice mini-core        Schläppi  
                          11.9    8, 9, 10, 11,               collections               et al. (2017) 
                                  and 12 
 GWAS         54         –        1, 2, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8,   GS   400 Rice diversity        Shakiba  
                                  9, 10, 11, and 12          panel                      et al. (2017) 
 GWAS         23         3.1–     1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6,   SS      249 Chinese rice          Zhang et al.  
                          13.2    10, 11, and 12              accessions                (2018) 

identified   on   chromosome   2   (qLTG-2-1),   chromosome   5   (qLTG-5-2.1   and  
qLTG-5-2.2), and chromosome 7 (qGV7-1.1 and  qGI7-1.2) (Xu et al. 2008; Yang  
et al. 2018). With a comprehensive analysis of GS-QTLs, nine genetic regions on  
eight chromosomes (Ch3: 17.2–17.8 Mb, Ch5: 21.5–21.6 Mb, Ch6: 5.4–6.2 Mb,  
Ch7: 1.7–2.7 and 20.13–22.6 Mb, Ch9: 21.9–24.6 Mb, Ch10: 11.6–14.2 Mb, Ch11:  
23.0–24.2  Mb,  and  Ch12:  7.0–7.1  Mb)  had  more  than  four  GS-QTLs  that  were  
colocalized.  Recently,  Yang  et  al.  (2018)  identified  12  and  23  QTLs  for  low-  
temperature germinability (LTG) and cold tolerance at the seedling stage by using  
recombinant inbred lines (RILs) that were derived from a backcross population of  
Dongnong422 and Kongyu131. Interestingly, seven QTLs on chromosome 12 in the  
7.1 Mb region and four QTLs on chromosome 7 in the 22.55 Mb region were colo- 
calized, and they were associated with several GS traits such as germination time  
and rate, mean length of incubation time, coefficient of germination, germination  
value, mean daily germination, and germination index. Cloning and characteriza- 
tion of the major QTL qLTG3-1, conferring more than 30% of the variation (Fujino  
et al. 2004), revealed that this gene encodes for a protein of unknown function. At  
the same time, a microarray analysis indicated that a complex metabolic and signal  

----------------------- Page 247-----------------------

236                                                                 S. Najeeb et al. 

  s  70     QTLs from Bi-parental mapping populations QTLs from GWAS QTLs from both studies 
 L 
 T   60 
 Q 
 f   50 
  o 
  r  40 
  e 
 b   30 
  m 
  u  20 
 N 
     10 
      0 

 c     35           Germination stage  Seedling stage   Reproductive stage 
 i 
 f 
 i 
 c     30 
 e 
 p 
 s 
  -    25 
 e 
 g  s 
 a  L  20 
 t 
 s  T 
 f  Q   15 
 o 
 r 
 e      10 
 b 
 m       5 
  u 
 N 
         0 

Fig. 3   Summary of QTL distributions by chromosome 

pathway was involved (Fujino and Matsuda 2010). Genome-wide expression analy- 
sis suggested that genes involved in defense responses were upregulated by qLTG3-1  
and played a more general role in germination (Fujino et al. 2008), whereas correla- 
tion  with  proteomics  indicated  its  involvement  in  rice  growth  and  adaptability  
(Fujino and Sekiguchi 2011). With genome-wide association mapping studies, Pan  
et al. (2015) identified significant 17 QTLs from the 174 mini-core collections of  
Chinese  rice  accessions,  45  QTLs  from  the  202  Rice  Mini-Core  Collections  
(Schläppi et al. 2017), and 54 QTLs from a global collection of 400 Rice Diversity  
Panel 1 (Shakiba et al. 2017) that were detected under low-temperature germinabil- 
ity  in  rice.  Given  these  challenges  and  potential  in  the  form  of  effective  QTLs  
(E-QTLs) with colocalization of QTLs, the development of molecular markers for  
selection for LTG would significantly contribute to identifying and developing LTS-  
tolerant varieties. 

----------------------- Page 248-----------------------

Genetics and Breeding of Low-Temperature Stress Tolerance in Rice                                    237 

Fig. 4   Diagram of LTS-tolerance QTLs by comprehensive literature survey and Gramene data- 
base (http://archive.gramene.org) in rice. On the right side, the numerical values in chromosome  
bars indicate the position of QTLs and genes in Mb, and on the left side, those indicate the QTLs  
for  stage-specific  and  LTS-tolerance  genes. A  colored  font  represents  the  stage-specific  QTLs  
(green: germination; blue: seedling; and red: reproductive/booting stage) and genes for LTS toler- 
ance (pink). The octagonal shapes and numerical values represent the two different stage-specific  
QTLs that were colocalized in the same genetic region, and the square shape indicates the QTLs  
and reported LTS-tolerance genes aligned together in the same genetic regions of chromosomes 

3.2       Seedling Stage 

Low-temperature  stress  severely  affects  the  SS,  causes  slow  growth,  yellowing  
symptoms on leaves, drying of leaves, and decreased early seedling vigor, and ulti- 
mately leads to seedling death (Wang et al. 2011; Lone et al. 2018). Tolerance of  
LTS at the SS is one of the key stages to ensure stable early seedling growth in  
temperate and high-altitude regions. For the genetics of the SS, several researchers  

----------------------- Page 249-----------------------

238                                                                                   S. Najeeb et al. 

Table 4   Colocalization of stage-specific QTLs for LTS tolerance 

                 Number                                 Position  
 Chromosome      of QTLs   QTLs                 Stage   (Mb)       Traits               References 
 1               4         qPL-1, qPW-1,        SS       4.5       Panicle length,      Liu et al.  
                           qSPA-1, and          and                panicle weight,      (2013), Park  
                           qCST1-2              RS                 chlorophyll          et al. (2013),  
                                                                   content, and         Wainaina  
                                                                   seedling cold        et al. (2018) 
                                                                   tolerance 
                 2         qCTSR1-1 and         GS      22.9       Seedling survival    Shakiba  
                           qCTGERM1-6           and                rate and cold        et al. (2017),  
                                                SS                 tolerance at         Zhang et al.  
                                                                   germination          (2018) 
                 2         qSCT1a and           SS      40.1       18 days after        Kim et al.  
                           qLTRSSR1-1           and                seedling cold        (2014), Pan  
                                                RS                 tolerance and        et al. (2015) 
                                                                   seed-setting rate 
 2               4         qCTS-2,              GS      21.1       Cold tolerance at    Lou et al.  
                           qMLIT2-1,            and                seedling stage,      (2007), Yang  
                           qCG2-1.1, and        SS                 mean length of       et al. (2018) 
                           qCG2-1                                  incubation time,  
                                                                   and coefficient of  
                                                                   germination 
                 4         qCTGERM2-4,          GS      21.8       Cold tolerance at    Shakiba  
                           qGV2-1,              and                germination,         et al. (2017),  
                           qRCL2-1, and         SS                 germination value,   Yang et al.  
                           qRL2-2                                  relative             (2018) 
                                                                   conductivity of  
                                                                   leaves, and root  
                                                                   length 
 3               3         qCTS3-8,             SS       3.7       Cold tolerance at    Pan et al.  
                           qLTRSSR3-1, and      and                seedling stage and   (2015),  
                           qLTSSR3-1            RS                 seed-setting rate    Wang et al.  
                                                                                        (2016) 

                                                                                          (continued) 

----------------------- Page 250-----------------------

Genetics and Breeding of Low-Temperature Stress Tolerance in Rice                                   239 

Table 4   (continued) 

                 Number                                  Position  
 Chromosome      of QTLs    QTLs                 Stage   (Mb)       Traits               References 
 4               5          qGR-4_18d,           GS       4.4       Germination rate     Miura et al.  
                            qGR-4_20d,                              after 18, 20, and    (2001),  
                            qGR-4_23d,                              23 days of cold      Wang et al.  
                            qGI-4-1_20d, and                        stress,              (2009) 
                            qLTG4-1                                 germination  
                                                                    index, and  
                                                                    low-temperature  
                                                                    germination 
                 2          qLTSS4-2 and         GS      30.1       Low-temperature      Pan et al.  
                            qLTSSR4-1            and                seedling             (2015),  
                                                 RS                 survivability and    Schläppi  
                                                                    seed-setting rate    et al. (2017) 
                 2          qLTG-4 and           GS      32.7       Germination rate     Dai et al.  
                            qCTB-1.4             and                at 12 days and       (2004), Xu  
                                                 RS                 cold tolerance at    et al. (2008) 
                                                                    booting stage 
                 2          qNGR4 and            GS      35.1       Germination rate     Pan et al.  
                            qLTSSvR4-1           and                after 8 days of      (2015), Jiang  
                                                 SS                 cold stress and      et al. (2017) 
                                                                    seedling survival  
                                                                    rate 
 6               2          qLTRSSR6-1 and       RS       5.1       Seed-setting rate    Pan et al.  
                            qLTSSR6-1                                                    (2015) 
                 2          qCTGERM6-2           GS       6.2       Cold tolerance at    Wang et al.  
                            and qCTS6-2          and                germination and      (2016),  
                                                 SS                 cold tolerance at    Shakiba  
                                                                    seedling stage       et al. (2017) 
                 2          qSNP-6 and           SS      21.7       Spikelet number      Jiang et al.  
                            qSCT-6               and                and cold tolerance   (2008),  
                                                 RS                 at seedling stage    Wainaina  
                                                                                         et al. (2018) 

                                                                                           (continued) 

----------------------- Page 251-----------------------

240                                                                                     S. Najeeb et al. 

Table 4   (continued) 

                 Number                                  Position  
 Chromosome      of QTLs    QTLs                 Stage   (Mb)       Traits                References 
 7               2          qLTSS7-2 and         GS        9.0      Low-temperature       Ji et al.  
                            qPSSR-7              and                seedling              (2010a, b),  
                                                 RS                 survivability and     Schläppi  
                                                                    percentage of seed   et al. (2017) 
                                                                    set reduction ratio  
                                                                    in cold-water-  
                                                                    treated plot 
                 2          q1-2IL, qRSLL,       GS        9.5      First and second      Ji et al.  
                            and qLTG-7           and                internode length,     (2008), Sun  
                                                 RS                 reciprocal            et al. (2019) 
                                                                    secondary leaf  
                                                                    length, and  
                                                                    low-temperature  
                                                                    germinability 
                 2          qCTB7 and            GS      10.5       Percentage of         Andaya and  
                            qCTGERM7-1           and                undeveloped           Mackill  
                                                 RS                 spikelets and cold    (2003b),  
                                                                    tolerance at          Shakiba  
                                                                    germination           et al. (2017) 
                 2          qPW-7 and            SS      18.2       Panicle weight        Wang et al.  
                            qCTS7-3              and                and cold tolerance    (2016),  
                                                 RS                 at seedling stage     Wainaina  
                                                                                          et al. (2018) 
                 7          qGV7-1, qCG7-1,   GS         22.5       Germination           Yang et al.  
                            qGI7-1,              and                value, coefficient    (2018) 
                            qMLIT7-1,            SS                 of germination,  
                            qRLcold7-1,                             germination  
                            qRFW7-1, and                            index, root fresh  
                            qRL7-1                                  weight, and root  
                                                                    length 
                 2          qCTGERM7-5           GS      28.3       Cold tolerance at     Schläppi  
                            and qLTSSvR7-2       and                germination and       et al. (2017),  
                                                 SS                 low-temperature       Shakiba  
                                                                    seedling              et al. (2017) 
                                                                    survivability rate 
 8               2          qCTS-8 and           SS        0.7      Cold tolerance at     Pan et al.  
                            qLTSSvR8-1                              seedling stage and    (2015),  
                                                                    seedling              Wang et al.  
                                                                    survivability rate    (2016) 
                 3          qLTRSSR8-1,          RS      14.3       Relative              Pan et al.  
                            qLTSSR8-1, and                          seed-setting rate     (2015) 
                            qCTSSR8-1                               and seed-setting  
                                                                    rate under cold  
                                                                    water 

                                                                                            (continued) 

----------------------- Page 252-----------------------

Genetics and Breeding of Low-Temperature Stress Tolerance in Rice                                     241 

Table 4   (continued) 

                 Number                                   Position  
 Chromosome      of QTLs     QTLs                 Stage   (Mb)       Traits                References 
 9               2           qIR-9, qIR-9, and    GS       13.6      Imbibition rate at    Wang et al.  
                             qLTG-9               and                48 h 4 days after      (2009), Li  
                                                  SS                 imbibition and        et al. (2013) 
                                                                      14th day of  
                                                                     germination 
                 2           qGV9-1,              GS      24.6       Germination value   Yang et al.  
                             qGV9-1.2, and        and                and crimp ratio of     (2018) 
                             qCRL9-1              SS                 leaves 
 10              4           qLTG-10,             GS       14.2      Low-temperature       Chen et al.  
                             qLTG-10,                                germinability and      (2006a), Xu  
                             qLTG-10, and                             12th and 13th day    et al. (2008) 
                             qSCT10                                  of germination 
                 3           qCST10,              GS,      19.1      Cold seedling         Pan et al.  
                             qLTG10-1, and        SS,                tolerance,             (2015),  
                             qLTRSSR10-1          and                low-temperature        Schläppi  
                                                  RS                 germination, and      et al. (2017) 
                                                                     relative seed-  
                                                                     setting rate 
                 2           qLTG10-2 and         GS      21.3       Low-temperature        Kuroki et al.  
                             qctb_2005-10         and                germination and        (2009),  
                                                  RS                 cold tolerance at      Schläppi  
                                                                     booting stage         et al. (2017) 
 11              2           qLTSS11-1 and        GS        5.7      Low-temperature        Schläppi  
                             qCL-11               and                seedling              et al. (2017),  
                                                  RS                 survivability and     Wainaina  
                                                                     culm length           et al. (2018) 
                 2           qLTG11.1 and         GS        6.8      Low-temperature       Wang et al.  
                             qCTS11.1             and                germinability and      (2011) 
                                                  SS                 cold tolerance at  
                                                                     seedling stage 
                 2           qCTS11-6 and         GS       19.9      Cold tolerance at     Wang et al.  
                             qGV11-1              and                seedling stage and     (2016), Yang  
                                                  SS                 germination value     et al. (2018) 

GS germination stage, SS seedling stage, BS/RS booting/reproductive stage 

have identified SS-specific QTLs using different genetic backgrounds of mapping  
populations such as RILs, near-isogenic lines (NILs), introgression lines, doubled  
haploids, and segregating F  and F  families (Biswas et al. 2017; Liang et al. 2018; 2 3 
Sun et al.  2019). However, the genetic backgrounds of japonica  donors as LTS-  
tolerant cultivars have revealed that several QTLs and genes are controlling LTS  
tolerance during the SS in rice. So far, more than 249 QTLs (both major and minor)  
have been mapped on all of the rice chromosomes responsible for LTS tolerance at  
the  seedling  stage  (Table  3).  Among  the  total  QTLs,  159  were  identified  from  

----------------------- Page 253-----------------------

242                                                                              S. Najeeb et al. 

biparental mapping populations and 90 from GWAS. The phenotypic variance of  
these QTLs ranges from 4.51% to 60.96%. Fifteen M-QTLs (≥30% PVE) were  
identified on six different chromosomes: 4, 6, 7, 8, 11, and 12. However, only a few  
of them were M-QTLs that were colocalized with different stage-specific QTLs. For  
instance, qSCT4.2 (57.62% PVE) on chromosome 4 (22.3–26.91 Mb) was shared  
with four QTLs (qRL-4-2_23d, q9d-4, qLTG-4-2, and qHD-4) for root length, per- 
centage of plumule growth, germination rate, and heading date under LTS condi- 
tions (Miura et al.  2001; Wainaina et al. 2018; Yu et al. 2018). Similarly,  qSCT8  
(60.96% PVE) on chromosome 8 (24.6–27.8 Mb) was shared with cold-tolerance  
seedling-stage QTL qCTS8-1 (Andaya and Mackill  2003b), seed weight per plant  
QTL qSWTCT8-4 (Shakiba et al. 2017), and seedling survival rate QTL qLTSSvR8-2  
(Pan  et  al.  2015).  Importantly,  two  M-QTLs  (qCTS12a  and  qCTS12b)  for  cold-  
induced wilting tolerance and cold-induced necrosis tolerance on chromosome 12  
had PVE of 40.6% and 41.7% (Andaya and Mackill 2003b), respectively. The same  
genetic region of 7.1–9.3 Mb overlapped with ten QTLs for GS- and RS-related  
traits such as germination index, incubation time, coefficient of germination, and  
seed-setting rate (Pan et al. 2015; Yang et al. 2018). Other two M-QTLs (qGAS12  
and  qSCT12.1)  had  PVE  of  42.9%  and  53.09%,  respectively. These  QTLs  were  
associated with the growth ability of seedlings at low temperatures (Han et al. 2004)  
and seedling cold tolerance (Yu et al. 2018) on chromosome 12. The genetic region  
of 24.2–25.0 Mb was shared with GS- and SS-specific QTL qCTS12.1 (Wang et al.  
2011), qLTSS12-2 (Schläppi et al. 2017), and qSWTCT12 (Shakiba et al. 2017). 
    The seedling-stage QTLs (seven genetic regions on seven chromosomes) were  
found  to  overlap  with  more  than  five  SS-specific  QTLs. The  highest  number  of  
QTLs was found to overlap in the 16.3–18.4 Mb region on chromosome 10 (12  
QTLs),  followed  by  11  QTLs  on  chromosomes  2  and  11  (at  14.3–17.7  and  
6.8–11.3  Mb),  six  QTLs  on  chromosome  3  (2.7–3.7  Mb)  and  chromosome  9  
(1.1–4.8 Mb), and five QTLs on chromosome 7 (22.5–23.8 Mb) and chromosome  
11 (24.9–25.4 Mb), respectively. However, two chromosomes (7 and 11) have sig- 
nificant M-QTLs that are also colocalized with more than five QTLs. In a deeper  
understanding of these two chromosomes, the M-QTL qCTS7(2) on chromosome 7  
(20.0–20.9 Mb) had PVE of 35.3%, and it overlapped with two other QTLs (qCT- 
GERM7- 4 and  qCTB-1.7) related to GS and RS (Dai et al. 2004; Ranawake et al.  
2014;  Shakiba  et  al.  2017).  Another  M-QTL,  qCTS11(1)-2  on  chromosome  11  
(20.5–26.0 Mb), had PVE of 35.6% (Ranawake et al. 2014), the same region was  
associated with a seed germination recovery rate QTL (qGRR11) (Jiang et al. 2017),  
and  two  SS-specific  QTLs  (qCTS11-9  and  qCTS11-10)  were  identified  from  the  
GWAS analysis (Wang et al.  2016). Therefore, the combination of stage-specific  
QTLs with GS, SS, and RS in the same genetic region could be a promising site for  
identifying  potential  candidate  genes  for  improving  LTS  tolerance  in  the  seed- 
ling stage. 

----------------------- Page 254-----------------------

Genetics and Breeding of Low-Temperature Stress Tolerance in Rice                                        243 

3.3      Booting/Flowering Stage  

Unlike the GS and SS, the RS is highly sensitive to LTS. Many traits, such as micro- 
 spore  abortion,  no  anther  dehiscence,  high  spikelet  sterility,  incomplete  panicle  
exsertion, delayed heading, and failure to produce pollen grains, are affected by  
LTS in the RS (da Cruz et al. 2013; Liang et al. 2018). Several studies have detected  
 and mapped many major- and minor-effect QTLs responsible for LTS tolerance at  
the booting/flowering stage using different genetic backgrounds of mapping popu- 
lations (Table 3). So far, more than 100 QTLs have been mapped on all of the rice  
chromosomes. The QTLs for tolerance at the RS showed that 81 QTLs from bipa- 
rental  mapping  populations  and  33  QTLs  from  GWAS  were  identified  from  the  
comprehensive  literature  survey.  The  phenotypic  variance  of  these  QTLs  ranges  
from 2.94% to 71.0%. A total of 14 M-QTLs (≥30% PVE) were located on six dif- 
ferent chromosomes (1, 2, 4, 7, 8, and 10). Saito et al. ( 1995) reported two QTLs on  
chromosomes 3 and 4 responsible for cold tolerance at the booting stage from Norin  
PL8. Saito et al. (2001) also reported two OTLs (Ctb-1 and Ctb-2) on chromosome  
4 governing spikelet fertility under cold stress by using a set of NILs derived from  
 a cross between cold-tolerant rice variety Norin PL8 and cold-sensitive commercial  
variety  Kirara397  from  northern  Japan.  By  using  cool-water  irrigation  (19  °C),  
 Kuroki et al. (2009) identified five QTLs for cold tolerance at the booting stage, four  
 QTLs for days to heading, and three QTLs for culm length on chromosomes 1, 2,  
 and 10. One of the major QTLs (qCTB.1) flanked by RM1003 and RM3482 on  
chromosome 1 associated with cold tolerance at the booting stage was discovered  
 after 3 years of field trials at the National Agricultural Research Centre for Hokkaido  
Region, Sapporo, Japan. Similarly, eight QTLs for the booting stage were identified  
on chromosomes 1, 4, 5, 10, and 11 by using a set of NILs from a cold-tolerant  
japonica    landrace   (Kunmingxiaobaigu)   and   cold-sensitive  japonica    cultivar  
 (Towada) (Xu et al. 2008). However, four QTLs (qCTB-1-1, qCTB-4-1, qCTB-5-1,  
 and qCTB-5-2) were detected in two different environments. 
    A total of nine genetic regions on chromosome 1 (28.6 and 36.6 Mb), chromo- 
 some 2 (21.5 Mb), chromosome 4 (24.5 Mb), chromosome 7 (8.1 and 18.1 Mb),  
chromosome 8 (11.5 Mb), and chromosome 10 (9.2–9.6 and 20.0–25.2 Mb) were  
 associated with tolerance of RS traits such as heading time, booting stage, culm  
length,  spikelet  fertility,  spikelet  number,  and  panicle  weight  (Dai  et  al.  2004;  
 Kuroki et al. 2009; Wainaina et al. 2018). The M-QTL (qCTB_1) on chromosome 1  
for cold tolerance at the booting stage had PVE of 47.3% (Kuroki et al. 2009), and  
it  was  close  to  the  genetic  region  associated  with  SS-specific  QTL  qCTSR1-3  
 (36.9 Mb) (Zhang et al. 2018) and MYB transcription factor OsMYB3R-2 (36.1 Mb),  
which  is  bound  to  the  mitotic-specific  activator  during  LTS  tolerance  (Ma  et  al.  
 2009). The overexpression of this gene significantly enhances the many transcripts  
for G2/M phase-specific genes in response to cold stress. Another M-QTL (qSNP_1;  
 28.6  Mb)  in  the  genetic  region  on  the  same  chromosome  overlapped  with  Osa-  
MIR319a . In rice, the miR319 gene family comprises two genes, Osa-MIR319a and  

----------------------- Page 255-----------------------

244                                                                              S. Najeeb et al. 

Osa-MIR319b.  Both  of  them  are  significantly  involved  in  increasing  leaf  blade  
width under cold tolerance (Yang et al. 2013a). The colocalization of stage- specific  
QTLs on chromosome 2 is associated with nine QTLs (21.1–21.8 Mb) for GS- and  
SS-specific QTLs (Lou et al. 2007; Shakiba et al. 2017; Yang et al. 2018). Similarly,  
the M-QTL qPW-7 (PVE of 41%) on chromosome 7 overlapped with cold-tolerance  
seedling-stage QTL qCTS7-3 (Wang et al. 2016). Six M-QTLs were associated with  
tolerance of RS traits on chromosome 10. In the interval regions of M-QTLs, two  
QTLs  (qLTG10-2,  21.1  Mb;  qCTGERM10-4,  22.3  Mb)  and  one  DNA-binding  
repeat MYB transcription factor (OsMYBS3, 22.1 Mb) are responsible for cold tol- 
erance at the GS and SS (Su et al. 2010; Schläppi et al. 2017; Shakiba et al. 2017).  
The overexpression of MYBS3 confers chilling tolerance, and it has also been asso- 
ciated  with  MYBS3-mediated  cold  signaling  pathways  (Su  et  al.  2010).  Taken  
together, the stage-specific QTLs of different combinations of GS, SS, and RS and  
associated candidate gene results could prove to be useful in breeding programs for  
low temperature-tolerant rice lines. These M-QTLs along with colocalized stage- 
specific QTLs have great potential for use in the future as their application through  
marker-assisted selection will hasten the process of developing cold-tolerant rice  
varieties for temperate and high-altitude ecosystems. 
    The LTS-tolerance QTLs mentioned above included a comparison of stage- specific  
QTL positions across different genetic backgrounds of mapping population studies.  
Such comparisons of stage-specific QTL positions are more informative. These QTLs  
may harbor potential candidate genes related to LTS, thus providing valuable informa- 
tion to develop LTS-tolerant rice cultivars. For this, the functionally characterized LTS- 
tolerance genes were collected from the OGRO database (Overview of Functionally  
Characterized Genes in Rice Online database) on the Q-TARO website (http://qtaro. 
abr.affrc.go.jp/ogro). A total of 38 candidate genes were involved in LTS tolerance in  
different parts of the rice plant. Specific gene functions for LTS tolerance and stages are  
mentioned in Table 5 and are also mapped on the genetic map (Fig. 4). Among these  
candidate genes, the majority of them were associated with the SS (25 genes), followed  
by two genes for the RS. The remaining eight genes were for the SS and RS, two genes  
for the GS and SS, and a single gene for the GS and RS. Functionally, the candidate  
genes were involved in altering the various metabolic and physiological pathways in  
different growth stages of LTS-tolerance mechanisms. Seven genetic regions on four  
chromosomes (17.9 Mb on chromosome 1; 25.6 and 34.4 Mb on chromosome 3; 15  
and 25.7 Mb on chromosome 5; and 23.9 and 26.3 Mb on chromosome 6) are colocal- 
ized  with  candidate  genes  and  QTLs.  For  example,  OsSPX1  is  colocalized  with  
qCTS6-5 at 23.9 Mb on chromosome 6. A previous study revealed that OsSPX1 plays  
a key role in the cross talk between cold tolerance, phosphate homeostasis, and oxida- 
tive  stress  tolerance  in  the  SS  (Wang  et  al.  2013a),  and  the  cold  tolerance  QTL  
(qCTS6-5) was mapped in the SS by using GWAS (Wang et al. 2016). Based on the  
fine-tuning of the interval regions of the M-QTLs, several researchers have identified  
many candidate genes for LTS tolerance. The M-QTLs and colocalized QTLs within  
identified genetic regions, especially on chromosomes 1, 3, 5, 7, and 10, may be poten- 
tial genomic regions to introgress into existing moderately LTS-tolerant genotypes or  
mega-varieties to improve their rate of tolerance in marker-assisted breeding programs. 

----------------------- Page 256-----------------------

Genetics and Breeding of Low-Temperature Stress Tolerance in Rice                       245 

4     Molecular Mechanisms of LTS Tolerance 

Several  genes  and  transcription  factors  are  involved  in  regulating  the  molecular  
pathways related to alteration of physiological and metabolic compounds and, fur- 
ther, reprogramming of their gene expression patterns against cold-stress tolerance  
mechanisms (Fig. 2). During LTS response, multiple sensors and signaling elements  
on the plasma membrane trigger the expression of COR (cold-responsive) genes via  
increasing cytosolic Ca2+ levels. This increase in Ca2+ is mediated by the ligand-  
activated Ca2+ channels. Further higher levels of Ca2+ in the cytosol lead to signal  

amplification through phospholipids (Williams et al. 2005; Hashimoto and Komatsu  
2007; Chinnusamy et al. 2010), which are sensed by calcium-binding proteins and  
other transcription factors regulating the expression of LTS-tolerance genes, which  
can  ultimately  lead  to  adaptation  and  survival  during  cold-stress  conditions  
(Shinozaki and Yamaguchi-Shinozaki 2000). However, the changes in various gene  
expression patterns are governed by a signal cascade mechanism, which also trig- 
gers the formation of plant hormones (abscisic acid, salicylic acid, and ethylene)  
that may be involved in integrating various stress signal pathways and controlling  
downstream stress responses. CBF (C-repeat/DREB [drought-responsive element-  
binding factor]) regulon is a highly conserved cold-response pathway (Chinnusamy  
et  al.  2010). The  ICE1–CBF  transcriptional  cascade  plays  a  crucial  role  in  cold  
acclimation (Zhang et al.  2004). Constitutively expressed ICE1 (inducer of CBF  
Expression  1)  binds  to  the  CBF  promoter  to  activate  cold-resistance  genes,  and  
overexpressing  ICE1  has  significantly  enhanced  cold  tolerance  in  Arabidopsis  
(Chinnusamy et al. 2003). Similarly, ICE2 (At1g12860 , a homolog of ICE1) over- 
expression  demonstrated  enhanced  freezing  tolerance  in  Arabidopsis  after  cold  
acclimation (Fursova et al. 2009). The report published showed that it interacts with  
the alpha subunit of the sole heterotrimeric G protein, leading to a cytosolic Ca2+  
signal or itself behaving as a cold-sensing calcium channel. A Ca2+ signal may be  

mediated  by CPKs and CBL-CIPKs, which in turn activate MAP kinases (Yang  
et al. 2010). Phosphorylation of transcription factors such as that of CAMTAs and  
ICE1/2 is supposed to be caused by activated MPKs, which in turn activate COR  
genes (Zhu 2016). 
   Most COR genes carry C-repeats or DREBs (CCGAC cis-element) in their pro- 
moters, which bind to CBFs to activate their expression (Chinnusamy et al. 2007).  
The induction of CBF1, CBF2, and CBF3 precedes the COR genes in response to  
cold stress. Constitutive overexpression studies in Arabidopsis revealed redundant  
functional activities of CBF1, CBF2, and CBF3 and showed different functions in  
cold acclimation (Gilmour et al. 2004). This was observed in the cbf2 T-DNA inser- 
tion mutant with enhanced tolerance of freezing (with or without cold acclimation),  
dehydration,  and  salt  stress  through  increased  expression  of  CBF1  and  CBF3.  
Furthermore,  the  cold-induced  expression  of  CBF1  and  CBF3  precedes  that  of  
CBF2, revealing a temporal difference in CBF expression. These results indicate  
that  CBF1  negatively  regulates  CBF3  and  CBF2  to  optimize  the  expression  of  
downstream target genes (Doherty et al. 2009). Transgenic analysis of CBF1 and  

----------------------- Page 257-----------------------

                                                                                                                                                                                                          2 
Table 5   Functionally characterized LTS-tolerance genes and stages in rice                                                                                                                               4 
                                                                                                                                                                                                          6 
                    Position     Gene  
 S. No.    Chr      (Mb)         length      Gene                Cold treatment        Stage     Expression analysis                Function                                      References 
 1         chr01      0.21       4.41 kb     OsCOIN              4 °C for 60, 72,      SS        Young root, stem, lamina,          Cold-inducible zinc finger protein            Liu et al.  
                                                                 and 84 h              and       leaf sheath, young panicle,   for tolerance of cold, salt, and                   (2007) 
                                                                                       RS        mature panicle, stem               drought 
                                                                                                 primordia, pedestal, and  
                                                                                                 stipital leaf 
 2         chr01      5.78       2.63 kb     OsGSK1              4 °C in Yoshida       SS        Lamina joint in collar             Glycogen synthase kinase3-like                Koh et al.  
                                                                 nutrient solution     and       region, vascular bundles           gene for stress signal-transduction           (2007) 
                                                                                       RS        of coleoptile, and young           pathways and in floral  
                                                                                                 panicle                            developmental processes 
 3         chr01      6.68       199 bp      Osa-                Initially, 12 °C      SS        Flag leaf                          Increased leaf blade width                    Yang et al.  
                                             MIR319b             for 7 days and                                                                                                   (2013a) 
                                                                 then at 4 °C for  
                                                                 4 days 
 4         chr01    17.91        5.21 kb     OsMKK6              4 °C for 0, 1, 3,     SS        Leaves                             Oryza sativa MAPK kinase 6 for                Kumar et al.  
                                                                 6, and 12 h                                                        tolerance of cold and salt                    (2008) 
 5         chr01    28.58        193 bp      Osa-                Initially, 12 °C      SS        Flag leaf                          Increased leaf blade width                    Yang et al.  
                                             MIR319a             for 7 days and                                                                                                   (2013b) 
                                                                 then at 4 °C for  
                                                                 4 days 
 6         chr01    32.22        3.75 kb     OsGH3-2             4 °C with 14 h        SS        Shoot, root, leaf size,            Modulation of abscisic acid and               Greco et al.  
                                                                 light/10 h dark       and       calli, and low levels in           auxin levels in response to                   (2012) 
                                                                 for 5 days            RS        panicles and stems                 stress-tolerance mechanisms of  
                                                                                                                                    cold and drought 
 7         chr01    36.13        5.66 kb     OsMYB3R-2           2 °C at 0, 24,        SS        Root, internode, leaf,             Encodes active transcription factor           Ma et al.               S 
                                                                                                                                                                                                          . 
                                                                                                                                                                                                            
                                                                 48, 60, 72, and       and       lamina joint, leaf sheath,         involved in higher transcript levels          (2009)                  N 
                                                                                                                                                                                                          a 
                                                                                                                                                                                                         j 
                                                                 84 h                  RS        flower, and immature seed          in G2/M phase                                                         e 
                                                                                                                                                                                                          e 
                                                                                                                                                                                                          b 
                                                                                                                                                                                                            
                                                                                                                                                                                                          e 
                                                                                                                                                                                                          t 
                                                                                                                                                                                                            
                                                                                                                                                                                                          a 
                                                                                                                                                                                                          l 
                                                                                                                                                                                                          . 

----------------------- Page 258-----------------------

                                                                                                                                                                                G 
                                                                                                                                                                                e 
                                                                                                                                                                                n 
                 Position   Gene                                                                                                                                                e 
                                                                                                                                                                                t 
                                                                                                                                                                                i 
                                                                                                                                                                                c 
S. No.   Chr     (Mb)       length     Gene             Cold treatment      Stage   Expression analysis            Function                                References           s 
                                                                                                                                                                                  
                                                                                                                                                                                a 
8        chr01   38.40      2.49 kb    SNAC2            3–8 °C for 48 h     SS      Root, stem, internodes,        Stress-responsive NAC gene,             Hu et al.            n 
                                                                                                                                                                                d 
                                                                                                                                                                                  
                                                                                    leaf sheath, and ligule        specifically induced in guard cells     (2008)               B 
                                                                                                                                                                                r 
                                                                                                                                                                                e 
                                                                                                                   in response to cold and salt                                 e 
                                                                                                                                                                                d 
                                                                                                                                                                                i 
9        chr01   38.40      2.49 kb    OsNAC6           4 °C for 0–24 h     SS      2-week-old rice leaves         NAM-ATAF-CUC family 6                   Nakashima            n 
                                                                                                                                                                                g 
                                                                                                                                                                                  
                                                                                                                   transcription factor, enhances          et al. (2007)        o 
                                                                                                                                                                                f 
                                                                                                                                                                                  
                                                                                                                   tolerance of drought, cold, salt,                            L 
                                                                                                                                                                                o 
                                                                                                                                                                                w 
                                                                                                                   and also blast disease 
                                                                                                                                                                                 - 
                                                                                                                                                                                T 
10       chr01   42.73      838 bp     OsDREB1F         4 °C for 0.5, 1,    SS      Young roots, young             Dehydration-responsive element-         Wang et al.          e 
                                                                                                                                                                                m 
                                                        6, and 24 h                 leaves, mature roots,          binding transcription factor 1F         (2008)               p 
                                                                                                                                                                                e 
                                                                                    mature leaves, spike, and                                                                   r 
                                                                                                                                                                                a 
                                                                                                                                                                                t 
                                                                                    callus                                                                                      u 
                                                                                                                                                                                r 
                                                                                                                                                                                e 
                                                                                                                                                                                  
                                                                                                                                                                                S 
11       chr02   20.17      988 bp     ASR3             4 °C for 5 h        SS      Leaves and roots               ABA-dependent stress-responsive         Joo et al.  
                                                                                                                                                                                t 
                                                                                                                                                                                r 
                                                                                                                   protein; induces drought- and           (2013)               e 
                                                                                                                                                                                s 
                                                                                                                                                                                s 
                                                                                                                   cold-tolerance mechanism                                       
                                                                                                                                                                                T 
                                                                                                                                                                                o 
                                                                                                                   regulated by hormone and sugar                               l 
                                                                                                                                                                                e 
                                                                                                                                                                                r 
                                                                                                                   signals                                                      a 
                                                                                                                                                                                n 
                                                                                                                                                                                c 
                                                                                                                                                                                e 
12       chr02   26.77      4.02 kb    OsTPP1           6–8 °C for 0        GS      2-week-old seedlings           Trehalose-6-phosphate                   Ge et al.  
                                                                                                                                                                                  
                                                                                                                                                                                i 
                                                        and 20 min, 1,      and                                    phosphatase1 serves as sugar            (2008)               n 
                                                                                                                                                                                  
                                                                                                                                                                                R 
                                                        3, 6, 12, 24, and   SS                                     storage and enhances tolerance of                            i 
                                                                                                                                                                                c 
                                                        72 h                                                       drought, cold, and salt stress,                              e 

                                                                                                                   without alteration of growth 
13       chr02   29.73      5.03 kb    OsFAD2           4 °C for 4 days     GS      Root, seed, stem, and leaf     Fatty acid desaturase 2 is a key        Shi et al.  
                                                                            and                                    enzyme responsible for increasing       (2012) 
                                                                            RS                                     germination rate and grain yield  
                                                                                                                   under LTS 

                                                                                                                                                             (continued) 

                                                                                                                                                                                 2 
                                                                                                                                                                                 4 
                                                                                                                                                                                 7 

----------------------- Page 259-----------------------

                                                                                                                                                                                                          2 
Table 5   (continued)                                                                                                                                                                                     4 
                                                                                                                                                                                                          8 
                    Position     Gene  
 S. No.    Chr      (Mb)         length      Gene                Cold treatment        Stage     Expression analysis                Function                                      References 
 14        chr03    25.63        4.02 kb     Osv1                20 °C for             SS        Pre-emerged immature               Chloroplast-localized protein                 Zhang et al.  
                                                                 22 days                         leaves                             NUS1, actively involved in the                (2011) 
                                                                                                                                    regulation of chloroplast RNA  
                                                                                                                                    metabolism and establishing the  
                                                                                                                                    plastid genetic system for cold  
                                                                                                                                    conditions 
 15        chr03    30.22        8.19 kb     OsHOS1              10 °C for 0 h         SS        2-week-old seedlings               E3-ubiquitin ligase OsHOS1 gene               Lourenço  
                                                                 (28 °C), 2 h                                                       involved in proteasome-mediated               et al. (2013) 
                                                                 (10 °C), 5 h                                                       stress response to cold stress 
                                                                 (10 °C), and  
                                                                 24 h (10 °C) 
 16        chr03    34.42        853 bp      ZFP182              4 °C for 4 days       GS        2-week-old seedlings               TFIIIA-type zinc finger protein182   Huang et al.  
                                                                                       and                                          promotes accumulation of various              (2012) 
                                                                                       SS                                           osmolytes, which involves  
                                                                                                                                    multiple abiotic stress tolerance 
 17        chr03    11.53        5.7 kb      OsCIPK03            4 °C for 0, 3, 6,     SS        2-week-old seedlings               Calcineurin B-like protein                    Xiang et al.  
                                                                 12, and 24 h                                                       significantly increased the amount            (2007) 
                                                                                                                                    of proline and soluble sugar  
                                                                                                                                    accumulation in drought- and  
                                                                                                                                    cold-stress conditions 
 18        chr04    34.98        1.22 kb     OsCAF1B             4 °C for 21 days      SS        3-week-old seedlings of            Rice carbon catabolite repressor 4            Chou et al.  
                                                                                       and       root, shoot, leaf, sheath,         triggers the deadenylation                    (2014) 
                                                                                       RS        leaf base, leaf tip, panicle       mechanism in the plant-P-body  
                                                                                                 axis, and spikelet                 and is linked with microtubules 
                                                                                                                                                                                                          S 
                                                                                                                                                                                                          . 
                                                                                                                                                                                                            
 19        chr05      2.22       1.04 kb     OsLti6b             12 °C for             RS        Vascular tissues of                Encodes for hydrophobic protein,              Kim et al.              N 
                                                                                                                                                                                                          a 
                                                                                                                                                                                                         j 
                                                                 4 days, before                  filaments, anthers, ovaries,   expressed in ovaries and stamens                  (2007)                  e 
                                                                                                                                                                                                          e 
                                                                 heading of                      stamens, leaves, and               of cold-treated flowers                                               b 
                                                                                                                                                                                                            
                                                                                                                                                                                                          e 
                                                                                                                                                                                                          t 
                                                                 5–10 days                       spikelets                                                                                                  
                                                                                                                                                                                                          a 
                                                                                                                                                                                                          l 
                                                                                                                                                                                                          . 

----------------------- Page 260-----------------------

                                                                                                                                                                               G 
                                                                                                                                                                               e 
                                                                                                                                                                               n 
                 Position   Gene                                                                                                                                               e 
                                                                                                                                                                               t 
                                                                                                                                                                               i 
                                                                                                                                                                               c 
S. No.   Chr     (Mb)       length    Gene              Cold treatment     Stage    Expression analysis           Function                                References           s 
                                                                                                                                                                                 
                                                                                                                                                                               a 
20       chr05   14.99      2.1 kb    OsWRKY45          4 °C for 3–24 h.   SS       Leaves                        OsWRKY45 plays a major role in          Tao et al.           n 
                                                                                                                                                                               d 
                                                                                                                                                                                 
                                                                                                                  ABA signaling and as a cross-talk       (2011)               B 
                                                                                                                                                                               r 
                                                                                                                                                                               e 
                                                                                                                                                                               e 
                                                                                                                  mechanism in biotic and abiotic  
                                                                                                                                                                               d 
                                                                                                                   stresses                                                    i 
                                                                                                                                                                               n 
                                                                                                                                                                               g 
                                                                                                                                                                                 
                                                                                                                                                                               o 
21       chr05   25.72      7.21 kb   OsTPS1            4 °C for 0, 1, 2,  SS       2-week-old seedlings          Overexpression of TPS1 results in       M Li et al.  
                                                                                                                                                                               f 
                                                                                                                                                                                 
                                                        4, 6, 12, and                                             increasing trehalose and proline        (2011b)              L 
                                                                                                                                                                               o 
                                                        24 h                                                      concentration and regulates                                  w 
                                                                                                                                                                                - 
                                                                                                                   stress-responsive genes for cold                            T 
                                                                                                                                                                               e 
                                                                                                                  and salt                                                     m 
                                                                                                                                                                               p 
                                                                                                                                                                               e 
22       chr05   28.62      2.25 kb   OsRAN2            4 °C for 72 h      SS       2-week-old seedlings          Ran is a nuclear GTPase involved        Chen et al.          r 
                                                                                                                                                                               a 
                                                                                                                                                                               t 
                                                                                                                  in GTP hydrolysis mechanism and         (2011)               u 
                                                                                                                                                                               r 
                                                                                                                                                                               e 
                                                                                                                  mediates nuclear transport of RNA                              
                                                                                                                                                                               S 
                                                                                                                                                                               t 
                                                                                                                  and proteins in cell cycle and in                            r 
                                                                                                                                                                               e 
                                                                                                                                                                               s 
                                                                                                                  regulating cold tolerance                                    s  
                                                                                                                                                                               T 
                                                                                                                                                                               o 
                                                                                                                                                                               l 
23       chr06    1.44      766 bp    OsDREB1C          4 °C for 24 h      SS       17-day-old seedlings          Overexpression of the                   Ito et al.  
                                                                                                                                                                               e 
                                                                                                                                                                               r 
                                                                                                                  dehydration-responsive element-         (2006)               a 
                                                                                                                                                                               n 
                                                                                                                  binding protein 1C significantly                             c 
                                                                                                                                                                               e 
                                                                                                                                                                                 
                                                                                                                                                                               i 
                                                                                                                  improves tolerance of drought-,                              n 
                                                                                                                                                                                 
                                                                                                                  cold-, and salt-stress conditions                            R 
                                                                                                                                                                               i 
                                                                                                                                                                               c 
24       chr06   23.88      4.53 kb   OsSPX1            4 °C for 24 h      SS       1-week-old seedlings          SPX domain proteins are involved        Wang et al.          e 

                                                                                                                  in phosphate (Pi) signal                (2013a) 
                                                                                                                  transduction pathways and cross  
                                                                                                                  talk between the oxidative  
                                                                                                                  pathway and cold-stress  
                                                                                                                  mechanism 

                                                                                                                                                             (continued) 

                                                                                                                                                                                2 
                                                                                                                                                                                4 
                                                                                                                                                                                9 

----------------------- Page 261-----------------------

                                                                                                                                                                                                        2 
Table 5   (continued)                                                                                                                                                                                   5 
                                                                                                                                                                                                        0 
                    Position     Gene  
 S. No.    Chr      (Mb)         length      Gene               Cold treatment         Stage    Expression analysis                Function                                     References 
 25        chr06    24.49        1.92 kb     OsiSAP8            4 °C for 0, 2, 3,      SS,      1-week-old seedlings               SAP gene family protein transcript   Kanneganti  
                                                                4, 6, 12, 24, and     and                                          was detected at higher levels in             and Gupta  
                                                                48 h                  RS                                           root and prepollination-stage                (2008) 
                                                                                                                                   panicle and is significantly  
                                                                                                                                   expressed in multiple abiotic  
                                                                                                                                   stresses 
 26        chr06    26.28        5.77 kb     OVP1               4 °C for 12 h          SS       10-day-old seedlings               Vacuolar HD-translocating                    Zhang et al.  
                                                                                                                                   inorganic pyrophosphatase 1                  (2011) 
                                                                                                                                   involved in decreased  
                                                                                                                                   malondialdehyde content and  
                                                                                                                                   accumulation of more proline for  
                                                                                                                                   tolerance of cold 
 27        chr06    27.30        2.17 kb     OsbZIP52/          4 °C for 0, 0.5,       SS,      Roots, leaves from                 Overexpression of basic leucine              Liu et al.  
                                             RISBZ5             1, 2, 4, 6, 12,       and       2-week-old seedlings, and          zipper 52 serves as negative                 (2012) 
                                                                24, and 48 h          RS        stems, flag leaves, flowers,   regulator of drought and cold  
                                                                                                and developing seeds at            stress 
                                                                                                2 days after flowering and  
                                                                                                at milk grain stage 
 28        chr07    18.72        8.48 kb     CRTintP1           5 °C for 3 days        SS       Leaf sheaths                       Accumulation of these                        Komatsu  
                                                                                                                                   calreticulin-interacting proteins            et al. (2007) 
                                                                                                                                   involved in signal transduction  
                                                                                                                                   mechanism in cold stress 
 29        chr08     2.18        3.5 kb      OsDEG10            4 °C for 0, 24,        SS       17-day-old seedlings               Encodes small RNA-binding                    Park et al.  
                                                                48, and 72 h.                                                      protein and plays a major role in            (2009) 
                                                                                                                                                                                                        S 
                                                                                                                                                                                                        . 
                                                                                                                                                                                                          
                                                                                                                                                                                                        N 
                                                                                                                                   response to cold, salt, anoxia, and  
                                                                                                                                                                                                        a 
                                                                                                                                   photooxidative stress                                               j 
                                                                                                                                                                                                        e 
                                                                                                                                                                                                        e 
                                                                                                                                                                                                        b 
                                                                                                                                                                                                          
                                                                                                                                                                                                        e 
                                                                                                                                                                                                        t 
                                                                                                                                                                                                          
                                                                                                                                                                                                        a 
                                                                                                                                                                                                        l 
                                                                                                                                                                                                        . 

----------------------- Page 262-----------------------

                                                                                                                                                                               G 
                                                                                                                                                                               e 
                                                                                                                                                                               n 
                 Position   Gene                                                                                                                                               e 
                                                                                                                                                                               t 
                                                                                                                                                                               i 
                                                                                                                                                                               c 
S. No.   Chr     (Mb)       length    Gene              Cold treatment     Stage    Expression analysis           Function                                References           s 
                                                                                                                                                                                 
                                                                                                                                                                               a 
30       chr08    3.95      2.1 kb    Oscrr6            20–35 °C for 0,    SS       3-week-old seedlings          Encodes an NDH-dependent                Yamori et al.        n 
                                                                                                                                                                               d 
                                                                                                                                                                                 
                                                        24, 48, and 72 h                                          cyclic electron flow and plays a        (2011)               B 
                                                                                                                                                                               r 
                                                                                                                                                                               e 
                                                                                                                  key role in physiological pathways                           e 
                                                                                                                                                                               d 
                                                                                                                  during photosynthesis and growth                             i 
                                                                                                                                                                               n 
                                                                                                                                                                               g 
                                                                                                                  development at low temperature                                 
                                                                                                                                                                               o 
                                                                                                                                                                               f 
                                                                                                                                                                                 
                                                                                                                                                                               L 
31       chr09   14.98      1.53 kb   OsWRKY76         4 °C for 72 h       SS       2-week-old seedlings          Plays a dual role in promoting          Yokotani  
                                                                                                                                                                               o 
                                                                                                                  blast disease resistance and cold       et al. (2013)        w 
                                                                                                                                                                                - 
                                                                                                                  tolerance                                                    T 
                                                                                                                                                                               e 
                                                                                                                                                                               m 
                                                                                                                                                                               p 
32       chr09   20.40      922 bp    OsDREB1A         4 °C for 24 h       SS       17-day-old seedlings          Overexpression of dehydration-          Ito et al.  
                                                                                                                                                                               e 
                                                                                                                  responsive element-binding              (2006)               r 
                                                                                                                                                                               a 
                                                                                                                                                                               t 
                                                                                                                  protein 1C significantly improves                            u 
                                                                                                                                                                               r 
                                                                                                                                                                               e 
                                                                                                                  tolerance of drought-, cold-, and                              
                                                                                                                                                                               S 
                                                                                                                                                                               t 
                                                                                                                  salt-stress conditions                                       r 
                                                                                                                                                                               e 
                                                                                                                                                                               s 
                                                                                                                                                                               s 
33       chr09   21.31      1.35 kb   OsPIP2            25 °C for 2 h      SS       Leaves and roots              Represents plasma membrane              Li et al.              
                                                                                                                                                                               T 
                                                                                                                                                                               o 
                                                                                                                  intrinsic proteins that are involved    (2008)               l 
                                                                                                                                                                               e 
                                                                                                                                                                               r 
                                                                                                                  in water transport and maintenance                           a 
                                                                                                                                                                               n 
                                                                                                                  of the water balance in cells under                          c 
                                                                                                                                                                               e 
                                                                                                                                                                                 
                                                                                                                                                                               i 
                                                                                                                                                                               n 
                                                                                                                  cold stress 
                                                                                                                                                                                 
                                                                                                                                                                               R 
                                                                                                                                                                               i 
34       chr10    2.90      1.37 kb   OsPRP3           4 °C for 10 h       RS       Leaves and flowers            Flower-specific proline-rich            Gothandam  
                                                                                                                                                                               c 
                                                                                                                  protein 3 enhances expression           et al. (2010)        e 

                                                                                                                  during cold stress 
35       chr10   22.13      8.31 kb   MYBS3            4 °C for 72 h       SS       1-week-old seedlings          Is a DNA-binding repeat MYB             Su et al.  
                                                                                                                  transcription factor and mediates       (2010) 
                                                                                                                  cold-signaling pathways 

                                                                                                                                                             (continued) 

                                                                                                                                                                                2 
                                                                                                                                                                                5 
                                                                                                                                                                                1 

----------------------- Page 263-----------------------

                                                                                                                                                                                                        2 
Table 5   (continued)                                                                                                                                                                                   5 
                                                                                                                                                                                                        2 
                    Position     Gene  
 S. No.    Chr      (Mb)         length     Gene                Cold treatment        Stage     Expression analysis               Function                                     References 
 36        chr11     3.28        971 bp     OsAsr1              12 °C for             SS        Leaf, palea and lemma,            Highly expressed with C-repeat/              Kim et al.  
                                                                4 days, before        and       and anther                        dehydration responsive element-              (2009) 
                                                                heading               RS                                          binding factor 1; involved in cold  
                                                                                                                                  tolerance at vegetative and  
                                                                                                                                  reproductive stages 
 37        chr11     3.28        971 bp     ASR1                4 °C for 5 h          SS        Leaves and roots                  ABA-dependent stress-responsive              Joo et al.  
                                                                                                                                  protein; induces drought- and                (2013) 
                                                                                                                                  cold-tolerance mechanism  
                                                                                                                                  regulated by hormone and sugar  
                                                                                                                                  signals 

                                                                                                                                                                                                       S 
                                                                                                                                                                                                       . 
                                                                                                                                                                                                         
                                                                                                                                                                                                       N 
                                                                                                                                                                                                       a 
                                                                                                                                                                                                      j 
                                                                                                                                                                                                       e 
                                                                                                                                                                                                       e 
                                                                                                                                                                                                       b 
                                                                                                                                                                                                         
                                                                                                                                                                                                       e 
                                                                                                                                                                                                       t 
                                                                                                                                                                                                         
                                                                                                                                                                                                       a 
                                                                                                                                                                                                       l 
                                                                                                                                                                                                       . 

----------------------- Page 264-----------------------

Genetics and Breeding of Low-Temperature Stress Tolerance in Rice                          253 

CBF3 RNAi lines revealed that both CBF1 and CBF3 are required for the full set of  
CBF regulon expression and freezing tolerance (Novillo et al. 2004). While respond- 
ing to cold stress, ICE1 and calmodulin-binding transcription activators (CAMTAs)  
bind  to  CBF3  and  CBF2  promoters,  respectively,  to  respond  to  their  expression  
(Doherty et al. 2009). Furthermore, in many cellular signaling pathways, particu- 
larly in response to cold stress, protein phosphorylation is considered crucial, and it  
predicts the involvement of one or more protein kinases to phosphorylate ICE1 to  
help in CBF expression (Chinnusamy et al. 2007; Yang et al. 2010). 

4.1      Signaling Pathways Leading to LTS Tolerance  
       from the Cloned Genes 

Transgenic and gene expression analysis has helped to understand the physiological  
mechanisms  responsible  for  tolerance  against  various  abiotic  stresses,  including  
LTS, in plants (Gao et al. 2008; Moraes De Freitas et al. 2016). Using the OGRO  
database on the Q-TARO website, we collected 38 candidate genes that have been  
functionally  characterized  for  LTS  tolerance  in  different  stages  of  the  rice  plant  
(Table 5 and Fig. 4). Among the total number of genes, eight were involved in the  
two  stage-specific  tolerance  mechanisms  of  LTS.  Four  genes  on  chromosome  1  
(OsCOIN,  0.2  Mb;  OsGSK1,  5.7  Mb;  OsGH3-2,  32.2  Mb;  and  OsMYB3R-2,  
36.1  Mb),  two  genes  on  chromosome  6  (OsiSAP8,  24.4  Mb;  and  OsbZIP52,  
27.3 Mb), and a single gene on chromosome 4 (OsCAF1B, 34.9 Mb) and chromo- 
some 11 (OsAsr1, 3.2 Mb) were associated with tolerance at the SS and RS in rice. 
   The promising genetic regions of OsGH3-2 (Greco et al. 2012) and OsMYB3R-2  
(Ma et al. 2009) showed clear evidence of seedling survival rate and seed-setting  
rate  under  cold  stress.  The  overexpression  of  OsGH3-2  significantly  modulates  
abscisic  acid  (ABA)  and  endogenous  indole-2-acetic  acid  (IAA)  homeostasis,  
resulting  in  increased  cold  tolerance.  Furthermore,  two  genes  (OsTPP1  and  
OsFAD2) on chromosome 2 and a single gene (OsZFP182) on chromosome 3 were  
associated with the GS, SS, and RS. Expression analysis of OsTPP1 confers a toler- 
ance mechanism for salt and cold by activating the transcriptional regulation path- 
ways (Ge et al.  2008). The expression pattern of  OsFAD2 under LTS in different  
tissues in young seeds, stems, roots, and leaves plays a significant role in membrane  
lipid desaturation and maintenance of the lipid balance in different photosynthetic  
tissue  (Shi  et  al.  2012).  Meanwhile,  overexpression  of  OsZFP182  in  transgenic  
lines showed an increasing accumulation of various osmolytes, which resulted in an  
increase in tolerance of drought, cold, and salt (Huang et al. 2012). 
    On chromosomes 5 and 10, two genes (OsLti6b and  OsPRP3) are associated  
with the RS. OsLti6a and OsLti6b encode membrane proteins that contribute greatly  
to membrane stability (Morsy et al.  2005; Kim et al. 2007).  OsPRP3 is a novel  
flower-specific prorich protein (PRP) that is significantly overexpressed in the RS  
under LTS, mainly in flower development (Gothandam et al. 2010). The remaining  

----------------------- Page 265-----------------------

254                                                                                    S. Najeeb et al. 

25 candidate genes are involved in LTS tolerance in the SS. The important upregu- 
lated or overexpressed genes/TFs concerning their expression and function in dif- 
ferent LTS stages and in cold stress conditions are described briefly in Table 5. The  
overexpression of several TFs and protein kinases, such as  OsISAP8,  OsbHLH1,  
OsDREB1/CBF, ROS-bZIP,  SNAC2,  OsCIPK12,  OsNAC6,  OsCOIN,  OsMAPK5,  
OsMYB4, and  OsISAP1, confers LTS tolerance in the SS in rice (Mukhopadhyay  
et al. 2004; Nakashima et al. 2007; Xiang et al. 2007; Kanneganti and Gupta 2008). 
    For tolerance in the RS, two cell wall acid invertase genes (OsINV1 and OsINV4)  
and one vacuolar acid invertase gene (OsINV2) were associated with low tempera- 
ture  at  the  pollen  developmental  stage.  Among  these  genes,  OsINV4  is  anther-  
specific and is downregulated by cold treatment, consequently causing a disturbance  
in hexose production and starch formation in the pollen grains in the tapetum cells.  
However, no decrease in expression of OsINV4 vis-à-vis any sucrose accumulation  
in the anthers and pollen grains in a cold-tolerant cultivar (R31) was observed after  
cold treatment (Oliver et al. 2005). The OsMAPK5 gene codes for a protein involved  
in kinase activity usually induced by ABA and various biotic and abiotic stresses.  
OX lines for the  OsMAPK5 gene exhibited increased tolerance of cold and other  
stresses  (Xiong  and Yang  2003).  Thus,  LTS  tolerance  at  specific  growth  stages  
involved essential stress-responsive genes and TFs, which may be potential targets  
in genetic improvement for LTS tolerance in rice. However, the constitutive overex- 
pression of these genes has led to metabolic instability and yield penalty and, as  
observed in so many experiments, has retarded growth under normal conditions, as  
shown by transgenic plants (Gilmour et al. 2000; Ito et al. 2006; Nakashima et al.  
2007). Using stress-inducible promoters such as the rd29A promoter instead of con- 
stitutive  promoters  minimizes  these  side  effects  on  plant  growth  (Kasuga  et  al.  
2004). However, although the complex nature of the cold-tolerance phenomenon  
has  been  explained  by  transgenic  technology,  as  many  genes/TFs  have  been  
exploited and manipulated, its field utility is yet to be explored and assessed. 
    The important COLD1 gene of Nipponbare in the background of 93-11 exhibited  
tolerance in the rice SS by encoding a GTPase-accelerating binding factor that regu- 
lates G-protein signaling by sensing cold to trigger Ca2+ signaling for cold tolerance  

(Ma et al. 2015). Five QTLs (on chromosomes 1, 2, 4, 6, and 8) were reported from  
the  cross  between  chilling-tolerant  Nipponbare  (japonica )  and  chilling-sensitive  
93-11  (indica)  cultivars  at  4  °C  of  cold  treatment.  Among  these  QTLs,  three  
(COLD2, COLD4, and COLD5) were found genetically interacting with each other,  
and together, they contributed PV of 16.8%, while  COLD1 alone exhibited PV of  
7.23%. Fine-mapping of COLD1 leads to the identification of sequential alterations  
at the first exon (SNP1) and fourth exon (SNP2) and five substitutions in introns  
                                                      j 
(SNP3) in the 4.78-kb region of the COLD1  gene (LOC_Os04 g51180). The trans- 
                                                                   jap 
genic approach proved that the SNP2 allele (COLD1                     ) had a significant overex- 
pression  compared  to WT  plants  and  suggested  that  COLD1  modulates  chilling  
tolerance in rice. Therefore, a good combination of stage-specific QTLs and cold- 
tolerance genes could be helpful for developing LTS tolerance in rice. Despite the  
detection of cold-tolerance genes and QTLs, to date, none of the LTS-tolerant vari- 
eties were ever developed through marker-assisted backcrossing (MAB). This raises  

----------------------- Page 266-----------------------

Genetics and Breeding of Low-Temperature Stress Tolerance in Rice                         255 

two questions: first, are the discovered LTS tolerance-related QTLs and genes veri- 
fiably useful for MAB? Second, is there a lack of training of LTS-tolerance rice  
breeders to exploit the advances in molecular genetics of LTS tolerance? However,  
a more reliable and reproducible QTL must be first identified to improve LTS toler- 
ance through more breeder-friendly MAB approaches. 

4.2      Genome-Wide Association Studies for LTS Tolerance 

The recent development in high-throughput genome sequencing platforms, GWAS,  
has become a powerful tool to exploit linkage disequilibrium to dissect traits and  
identify the genomic regions associated with a trait of interest. GWAS have been  
used in various research efforts such as drought, salinity, and deficiency and toxicity  
tolerance  to  understand  the  trait  associated  with  the  whole-genome  sequence  of  
genotypes using a diverse set of rice germplasm accessions. The sequencing of rice  
genotypes is commonly classified into SNP array genotypes and resequenced SNP  
genotypes. Zhang et al. (2018) identified high-quality filtered reads with a call rate  
of 95% for 3867 SNP markers by genotyping 249 indica rice varieties using a 5K  
SNP rice array for cold tolerance at the bud burst stage. GWAS for severity of dam- 
age (SD) and seed survival rate (SR) revealed 47 SNP loci significantly associated  
with SD and SR in cold treatment at 5 °C for 5 days. Among these SNPs, the major  
QTL  qCTSR1-2  on  chromosome  1  overlapped  with  qCTSD1-2,  which  explains  
13.2% of the total phenotypic variation. GWAS for germination and reproductive  
stages that Shakiba et al. (2017) conducted with the Rice Diversity Panel 1 (RDP1),  
which consisted of 400  O. sativa accessions belonging to five major subpopula- 
tions, resulted in the identification of 42 loci associated with cold tolerance, and  
several  QTLs  were  colocalized  with  previously  reported  LTS-tolerance  QTLs.  
Recently,   Xiao   et   al.   (2018)   identified   a   potential   candidate   locus   (LOC_ 
Os10g34840)  on  chromosome  10,  which  is  responsible  for  cold  tolerance  at  the  
seedling stage, by assessing the total diversity panel of 1033 rice accessions with  
289,231 SNP markers. The loci at 18.58–18.65 Mb overlap with previously reported  
cold-tolerance  QTLs  (Xiao  et  al.  2015),  and,  furthermore,  they  have  been  fine-  
mapped and validated by quantitative expression analysis. Similarly, using specific  
locus amplified fragment sequencing (SLAF-seq) technology, Song et al. (2018)  
conducted GWAS with 150 accessions of rice landraces by using high-density SNPs  
A total of 26 significant SNPs were associated with cold tolerance at the seedling  
stage. These SNPs had PVE ranging from 26% to 33%, and among them, three  
QTLs were colocalized with previously cloned genes such as  OsFAD2, OsMYB2,  
and OsCIPK03 related to LTS tolerance at the rice seedling stage (Yang et al. 2012).  
Interestingly, Song et al. (2018) noticed a strong signal of trait-marker association  
peaks on chromosome 1, with PVE of 27%. The expression profiling and bioinfor- 
matics analyses reveal that a novel candidate gene (Os01g0620100) showed a sig- 
nificant difference between the cultivars tolerant and sensitive to LTS because of the  
polymorphism in the WD40 domain. Thus,  Os01g0620100 is an important source  

----------------------- Page 267-----------------------

256                                                                               S. Najeeb et al. 

for developing LTS tolerance by using marker-assisted selection. A comprehensive  
literature survey of GWAS for LTS tolerance resulted in a total of 239 QTLs distrib- 
uted on all 12 chromosomes (Fig. 3). Among these, 116 QTLs for GS, 90 QTLs for  
SS,  and  33  QTLs  for  RS  were  reported  by  several  researchers  (Pan  et  al.  2015;  
Wang et al. 2016; Sales et al. 2017; Schläppi et al. 2017; Shakiba et al. 2017; Singh  
et al. 2017; Zhang et al. 2018). The highest number of QTLs was detected on chro- 
mosome 2 (42), whereas the lowest number was detected on two chromosomes, 10  
and 12 (14 QTLs). The physical position of each stage-specific QTL from GWAS  
revealed  that  three  major  genetic  regions  on  chromosome  1  (41.39–41.86  Mb),  
chromosome 3 (3.03–3.76 Mb), and chromosome 6 (6.01–6.80 Mb) were colocal- 
ized with more than four QTLs. Two QTLs (qCTGERM1-8 and  qSWTCT1-2) for  
GS and two other QTLs (qCTS1-4 and qCTS1-5) for SS stage-specific QTLs over- 
lapped on chromosome 1 (Wang et al. 2016; Shakiba et al. 2017). Similarly, eight  
QTLs     (qCTS3-6,      qCTS3-7,     qCTSR3-1,      qCTSD3-1,       qCTS3-8,     qLTRSSR3-1,  
qLTSSR3-1, and  qCTS3-9) detected on chromosome 3 for GS, SS, and RS were  
colocalized (Pan et al. 2015; Wang et al. 2016; Zhang et al. 2018). Four QTLs asso- 
ciated with three traits related to germination rate, cold tolerance at the seedling  
stage, and plumule recovery growth after cold exposure were colocalized on chro- 
mosome 6 for the GS and SS (Wang et al. 2016; Schläppi et al. 2017; Shakiba et al.  
2017). Interestingly, five chromosomal regions at 30.1 Mb (chromosome 4), 5.1 Mb  
(chromosome 6), 28.3 Mb (chromosome 7), 14.2 Mb (chromosome 8), and 27.3 Mb  
(chromosome 12) were associated with the GS, and some RS-specific QTLs were  
also aligned together in the same genetic regions. With a large number of QTLs for  
stage-specific  traits  from  GWAS  information  from  the  genome  sequencing  data,  
high-throughput phenotyping and various statistical methods could provide benefi- 
cial information for MAB programs and the discovery of potentially useful chilling-  
tolerance genes/alleles. Furthermore, the combination of gene expression profiling  
and omics technologies such as proteomics, metabolomics, epigenetics, and genome  
editing  tools  will  facilitate  the  confirmation  of  more  candidate  gene  functions  
in rice. 

4.3      Transcriptomics Related to LTS Tolerance 

Transcriptome sequencing has increased the accessibility of genomic resources in  
various crops, including rice. Transcriptome analysis using microarray technologies  
is one of the most powerful techniques that link sequence information directly to  
functional genomics (Sinha et al. 2018) and immensely contributes to understand- 
ing  the  specific  tissue-  or  stress  response-related  genes  in  the  molecular  mecha- 
nisms  of  biotic  and  abiotic  stress  tolerance.  Comparative  transcriptome  analysis  
provides a way to distinguish different genes that are regulated in stress tolerance in  
comparison to expression patterns between the homologous genes in various crops  
(Lee et al. 2019). In response to LTS tolerance, Yang and Poovaiah (2003) observed  
that, at low temperatures, commonly upregulated genes were associated with Ca2+  

----------------------- Page 268-----------------------

Genetics and Breeding of Low-Temperature Stress Tolerance in Rice                      257 

signal transduction. Several genes such as Ca2+-dependent protein kinases, calmod- 

ulin, mitogen-activated protein kinase 1, Ca-transporting ATPases, protein phospha- 
tase  2C  family  proteins,  and  serine/threonine-protein  kinases  related  to  signal  
transduction pathways were identified in the endoplasmic reticulum-phase of chill- 
ing-stress tolerance (Yang et al. 2012; Zhang et al. 2012b). A key initial event that  
occurs in cold-stress response is the induction of the AP2/EREBP TF family, which  
includes  CBF/DREB  TFs,  which  are  commonly  induced  within  30  min  of  cold  
treatment in plants (Zhang et al. 2004; Ito et al. 2006). CBF/DREB genes have also  
been shown to be gated by a circadian clock and to display cyclic behavior during  
cold stress (Gilmour et al. 2004). Previously, Bai et al. (2015), working on the anther  
transcriptome of photo-thermosensitive genic male sterile rice lines Y58S and P64S  
under cold stress, identified some differentially expressed genes (DEGs) involved in  
signal transduction, metabolism, transport, and transcriptional regulation. Among  
these DEGs, more differentially expressed MYB (myeloblastosis) and three zinc  
finger family TFs and signal transduction components such as calmodulin-/calcium- 
dependent  protein  kinases  were  observed  in  the Y58S  comparison  group.  LOC_ 
Os01g62410 (OsMYB3R-2), identified as an upregulated gene in Y58S, encodes for  
an  MYB  domain  protein  activation TF  that  regulates  the  CBF  pathway  and  cell  
cycle progression during cold stress, resulting in increased cold tolerance (Ma et al.  
2009).  In  a  similar  study,  Su  et  al.  (2010)  reported  the  role  of  MYBS3  (LOC_ 
Os10g41200) in regulating signaling pathways at low temperature, suggesting that  
MYB family members are good candidates for improving LTS tolerance in rice.  
Furthermore,  molecular  evidence  indicates  that  CBF  responds  early,  and  MYBS  
late, to chilling stress, suggesting distinct pathways that function sequentially and  
complementarily  to  promote  short-  and  long-term  cold-stress  adaptation  in  rice.  
Gene profiling on chilling-tolerant japonica  rice incubated for 24 h at 10 °C revealed  
that an “early response” regulatory network including ROS- bZIP1 plays a crucial  
role in short-term adaptive responses (Yang et al. 2012). Moreover, several regula- 
tory clusters, including bZIP factors acting on as1/ocs/TGA-like element-enriched  
clusters, R2R3-MYB factors acting on MYB2-like element-enriched clusters, and  
ERF factors acting on GCC-box/JAre-like element- enriched clusters, are involved  
in early chilling response, and oxidative signaling by H O  is at the center of the 2 2 
regulatory network (Yun et al. 2010). 
   Furthermore,  genes  involved  in  gibberellic  acid  (GA),  indole-3-acetic  acid  
(IAA), and cytokinin biosynthesis responded to cold temperature in such a way that  
their  expression  profiles  were  either  downregulated  or  upregulated  in  cold-  
susceptible and cold-tolerant rice varieties (Park et al. 2010). For example, the IAA  
biosynthesis  genes  YUCCA1  and  TAA  1:1  showed  variety-specific  regulation.  
Among the genes involved in cytokinin biosynthesis and signaling, the expression  
of LOG, HK1, and HK3 was significantly downregulated only in the cold-suscepti- 
ble variety. Similarly, among the genes involved in ABA biosynthesis, neoxanthin  
synthase (NSY), and ABA-aldehyde oxidase 3 (AAO3) were downregulated only in  
the cold-tolerant variety. It is presumed that the levels of these bioactive hormones  
are maintained relatively high at cold temperatures in cold-tolerant varieties, which  
can help minimize the cold stress imposed on developing reproductive organs. 

----------------------- Page 269-----------------------

258                                                                                              S. Najeeb et al. 

    In a comparative transcriptome analysis of the shoots and roots of cold-tolerant  
variety TNG67 and cold-sensitive variety TCN1, the expression of OsRR4 type-A  
response regulators in roots of TNG67 was upregulated. The TFs OsIAA23, SNAC2,  
OsWRKY1v2, 24, 53, 71, HMGB, OsbHLH, and OsMyb were expressed in the roots  
or shoots of TNG67, and AP2/ERF in the shoots and roots of both varieties during  
cold  stress,  making  them  good  candidate  genes  for  cold-stress  tolerance  in  rice.  
Also, phytohormone-related genes for ABA, polyamine, auxin, and jasmonic acid  
were preferentially upregulated in the shoots and roots of the cold-tolerant geno- 
type.  Functional  clustering  of  the  majority  of  DEGs  involved  in  early  chilling  
response showed their role in a complicated chilling-responsive regulatory network  
such  as  phytohormone  signaling,  photosynthesis  pathway,  ribosome  translation  
machinery, and phenylpropanoid biosynthesis. The localization of the majority of  
DEGs in chloroplasts suggests a link between chilling-stress tolerance in rice and  
photosynthesis (Wang et al.  2016). This was observed in a comparative transcrip- 
tome profiling of the common wild rice GXWR (China)-derived chilling-tolerant  
chromosome segment substitution line. 

4.4      Proteomics Related to LTS Tolerance  

Proteins are the key components in the majority of cellular events; hence, investigat- 
ing their structure, function, abundance, and interactions at a given time is advanta- 
geous  to  “omics”  studies.  Protein  translational  and  posttranslational  regulations,  
particularly of stressor-specific protein classes altered due to stress conditions, can  
also be detected by proteomics, thereby rendering a complex phenomenon such as  
the tolerance mechanisms for cold and other stresses well understood and addressed.  
Two-dimensional  gel  electrophoresis  (2-DE)  or  liquid  chromatography  coupled  
with tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) is used in protein extraction followed  
by protein separation and identification (Wittmann-Liebold et al.  2006; Fournier  
et al. 2007; Hashimoto and Komatsu 2007; Wang et al. 2013c). 
    Proteomic studies were undertaken pertaining to cold tolerance in rice seedlings  
and anthers (Cui et al. 2005; Yan et al. 2006; Hashimoto and Komatsu 2007; Zhang  
et al. 2014a; Lee et al. 2015). Comprehensive transcriptomic and proteomic analy- 
ses in rice have illustrated that many genes and functional proteins are involved in  
the crop’s chilling response (Hashimoto and Komatsu 2007; Nakashima et al. 2007;  
Kanneganti and Gupta 2008; Oh et al. 2009; Lee et al. 2015). Furthermore, many  
proteins,  including  otsA  and  otsB  (trehalose  synthesis),  choline  monooxygenase  
(glycine betaine synthesis), and  WFT1 and  WFT2 (fructan synthesis) (Garg et al.  
2002; Shirasawa et al. 2006), were found to be involved in the regulation of low-  
temperature  tolerance  in  rice.  Using  matrix-assisted  laser  desorption  ionization- 
time of flight mass spectrometry (MALDI-TOF MS), Cui et al. (2005) observed 60  
protein spots progressively upregulated in response to LTS. These cold-responsive  
proteins include four factors of protein biosynthesis, four molecular chaperones,  
two proteases, eight enzymes involved in the biosynthesis of cell wall components,  

----------------------- Page 270-----------------------

Genetics and Breeding of Low-Temperature Stress Tolerance in Rice                         259 

and seven antioxidative enzymes and proteins linked to energy pathways as in sig- 
nal transduction, besides two proteins of unknown function. In addition to these  
proteins, chloroplast proteome is also subject to cold stress because of the localiza- 
tion  of  identified  proteins  in  the  chloroplast.  Other  cold-responsive  proteins  are  
sucrose  synthase  (Maraña  et  al.  1990),  phenylalanine  ammonia-lyase  (Sanchez- 
Ballesta et al. 2000), and ferritin (Kawamura and Uemura 2003). Proteins involved  
in energy metabolism in the leaf blade were upregulated, while defense-related pro- 
teins were downregulated or even disappeared when rice seedlings were exposed to  
5 °C for 48 h (Hashimoto and Komatsu 2007). Hashimoto and Komatsu (2007) used  
the 2D PAGE-based proteomics method for rice root plasma membrane and identi- 
fied 12 cold-responsive proteins, including cold shock protein-1, which decreased  
significantly  under  cold- stress  conditions.  Most  of  the  cold-responsive  proteins  
associated  with  energy  production,  signal  transduction,  protein  synthesis,  and  
defense were revealed by their functional characterization. 
   Proteins involved in phytohormone biosynthesis play a role in stress tolerance.  
Asakura et al. (2004) found that GA-related proteins have increased expression dur- 
ing rice seed germination. The elevated expression of GA receptor GID1L2 observed  
in the resistant strain suggests the role played by GA in mediating the response to  
cold temperature in the germinating embryo. The low-temperature germination of  
the resistant rice line was associated with proteins involved in GA signaling, protein  
trafficking,  and  ABA-mediated  stress  response  compared  with  the  susceptible  
strain. Colebrook et al. (2014) also noticed that increased GA biosynthesis and GA  
signaling were linked to stress tolerance. The elevated expression of TF HBP-1b  
involved in the general mechanism of protein trafficking through a secretory path- 
way and two proteins of unknown function, UPF0041 domain-containing protein  
(LOC_Os07g26700.1)  and  the  expressed  protein  (LOC_Osg09910.1),  suggested  
their possible role in seed germination or cold stress (Lee et al. 2015). Phosphorylation  
of cellular proteins or protein kinase activation during the initial stage of cold accli- 
mation has also been observed (Garbarino et al. 1991), and a fragment of RuBisCO  
large subunit protein was phosphorylated to a greater extent than others in cold-  
tolerant rice varieties using 2-DE analysis (Komatsu et al.  1999). 
   Gel-based  protein  separation  has  been  used  in  proteomic  studies,  which  has  
resulted in the identification of only high-abundant proteins, leaving TFs, kinases,  
and  transport  proteins  belonging  to  low-abundant  protein  classes  undetected.  
Although advanced LC-based separation techniques have resulted in the detectabil- 
ity of low-abundant proteins, phosphorylation, glycosylation, and oxidation caused  
by posttranslational changes that are likely to be induced by stressors are yet to be  
comprehensively explained with the use of these approaches. Also, metabolic pro- 
cesses mediated by plant hormones as well as subcellular protein translocation and  
protein-protein interactions are yet to be found associated with the cold-stress phe- 
nomenon and tolerance mechanisms. To move forward with our knowledge on a  
time-dependent  response,  new  proteomic  strategies,  such  as  hydrogen-deuterium  
exchange and surface plasmon resonance-MS, together with integrated cell biology  
approaches such as immune precipitation and live imaging analysis, will be required. 

----------------------- Page 271-----------------------

260                                                                                               S. Najeeb et al. 

4.5      Metabolomics Related to LTS Tolerance  

Metabolites are the final response of a biological system to environmental changes  
so that an aberrant metabolism is linked to the most predictive of phenotypes. The  
successful application of metabolomics can provide a deeper insight into a plant’s  
phenotypic  response  to  abiotic  stresses  and  can  determine  the  pattern  related  to  
stress tolerance. For example, in a targeted metabolite analysis of two rice geno- 
types under LTS (13/12 °C), Morsy et al. (2007) observed that the chilling-tolerant  
genotype  exhibited  accumulated  galactose  and  raffinose,  while  the  same  sugars  
were found to be decreasing in the chilling-sensitive variety. Also, a higher endog- 
enous content of oxidative products and the presence of a more efficient reactive  
oxygen species (ROS)-scavenging metabolism were found in the chilling-tolerant  
genotype during chilling stress. Similarly, Arbona et al. (2013) studied photosyn- 
thetic dysfunction and effectors of osmotic readjustment at primary metabolite lev- 
els  (sugars,  amino  acids,  and  Krebs  cycle  intermediates)  and  secondary  levels  
(antioxidants) and observed a relative accumulation of some primary or secondary  
metabolites. 
    Most sugars have earlier been reported to function as osmoprotectants, nutrients,  
and signaling molecules in rice (Guy et al. 2008; Ma et al. 2009). Similar studies  
have been carried out in other crops (Urano et al. 2009; Bowne et al. 2012; Araújo  
et al. 2013). In a comparative metabolomics study between the varieties LTH (cold-  
tolerant japonica )  and  IR29  (cold-sensitive  indica)  under  no-stress  and  chilling-  
stress conditions (4 °C for 2, 8, 24, and 48 h, and recovery of 24 h), it was observed  
that 82 of 106 metabolites exhibited significant differences and described 18.1% of  
the total PV (Zhao et al. 2013). Of the total of 120 stress vs. control comparisons,  
85 (71%) cases had significantly increased amino acid levels, whereas only 7 (6%)  
cases had significantly decreased amino acid levels, which involved aspartic acid,  
cysteine, glutamic acid, and glycine. Compared to IR29, LTH recorded more amino  
acids that significantly increased at all times of the stress as well as considerably  
higher levels of cysteine, isoleucine, phenylalanine, proline, serine, threonine, and  
valine. This strongly suggests that differential amino acid accumulation is a general  
feature of the variety in response to chilling stress at the seedling stage. Regarding  
organic acids, 81 of 248 (33%) showed significantly decreased levels of LTH com- 
pared  to  IR29,  whereas  only  24  (10%)  cases  had  significantly  increased  levels.  
Consistent  decreased  levels  were  obtained  for  four  organic  acids  (oleic,  quinic,  
eicosanoic, and sinapic) across all times of the stress in both genotypes, implying  
that  energy  production  is  remarkably  inhibited  in  rice  during  chilling  stress.  
Furthermore, 34 of 304 (11%) cases showed significantly increased levels of some  
sugars in LTH at later times of the stress, signifying that these late-accumulating  
sugars may be associated with the cold tolerance of LTH. Zhang et al. (2016) per- 
formed  a  comparative  metabolomics  study  between  japonica   Nipponbare  and  
indica 93-11 at six times during chilling treatment and found that amino acid accu- 
mulation occurred on a large scale and was consistent with the appearance of chill- 
ing injury. The accumulation of antioxidation-related compounds appeared earlier  

----------------------- Page 272-----------------------

Genetics and Breeding of Low-Temperature Stress Tolerance in Rice                                                  261 

in Nipponbare than in 93-11 at the mid-treatment stage, whereas, during recovery, a  
higher level of ROS was observed in Nipponbare. Furthermore, metabolites related  
to  stress  tolerance  and  senescence  were  found  to  be  induced/accumulated  in  
Nipponbare and 93-11, respectively. 
    The combinational approaches of genome and metabolome are more interesting  
for  phenotype  prediction  and  are  quite  useful  in  breeding  for  stress  tolerance.  
Selection based solely on genetic markers is highly biased because the environment  
profoundly influences most of the economic traits. The development of a metabolite  
quantitative trait locus (mQTL) and metabolome-wide association studies (MWAS)  
could be helpful in crop improvement by overcoming the problems emerging from  
differing environmental conditions during selection. This field will take advantage  
of the new plant genomes issued recently and of the modern and more powerful  
metabolite profiling tools (Dumas 2012; Wei et al. 2018). Some useful results at the  
metabolome level and the involvement of different metabolites in plant responses,  
as discussed above, have provided more insight into the complexity of cold-stress  
response. Even though this has extended our understanding of the molecular mecha- 
nism of plant response to stresses, their reconfiguration under stresses is still quite  
complex  because  of  the  involvement  of  multiple  molecular  pathways  (Guy  
et al. 2008). 

5      Breeding Approaches for LTS Tolerance in Rice 

Developing breeding strategies for LTS-tolerant rice varieties is still a challenge to  
plant breeders because of the complex nature and lack of suitable rice varieties for  
high-latitude  regions,  mainly  in  China,  Japan,  Australia,  and  Korea.  Therefore,  
identifying LTS-tolerance traits and breeding tolerant rice varieties are necessary  
for  these  regions.  Several  researchers  have  proposed  different  strategies  such  as  
adjusting sowing time, selecting suitable rice varieties with growth duration that  
avoids the peak LTS periods, and replacing LTS-susceptible rice varieties (Ye et al.  
2009). However, with rapid changes in GCVs and the expected population increases,  
breeding for LTS tolerance and improving LTS-tolerance mechanisms are the criti- 
cal factors to meet future global food demand. 

5.1       Improving LTS Tolerance by Conventional   
          Breeding Approaches 

Cold tolerance is the ability of rice plants to sustain yield in the presence of low-  
temperature  stress  (Shakiba  et  al.  2017).  Genetic  breeding  has  been  used  as  the  
approach to cope with low-temperature sensitivity. The indica subspecies are better  
adapted  to  tropical  environments  such  as  India,  China,  and  Indonesia,  while  

----------------------- Page 273-----------------------

262                                                                                S. Najeeb et al. 

japonica  cultivars have more adaptation under temperate climates such as those in  
Japan,  Korea,  and  Java,  Indonesia  (Takahashi  1984).  It  has  been  observed  that  
japonica  genotypes are relatively better in tolerating a higher degree of cold stress  
at the germination stage (Lee  2001; da Cruz and Milach 2004) as well as at the  
vegetative and reproductive stages (Saito et al. 2004; da Cruz et al. 2006a; Zhang  
et al. 2017; Xiao et al. 2018). However, some indica genotypes from high-latitude  
regions may have moderate cold tolerance (Gautam et al. 2018). There are reports  
of  some javanica ,  an  ecotype  of japonica ,  being  tolerant  of  cold  (Sweeney  and  
McCouch  2007).  Cold-tolerance  genes  from javanica   cultivars  such  as  Silewah,  
Lambayeque 1, and Padi Labou Alumbis were introduced into several temperate  
japonica  breeding lines in Japan (Saito et al. 2004). 
    Selection under field conditions for cold tolerance in rice is unpredictable; hence,  
for effective selection, robust screening protocols using strong selective agents such  
as low temperature and the use of controlled air or low water temperature are highly  
important  (da  Cruz  et  al.  2006b). The  major  limitation  to  evaluating  large  plant  
populations in controlled-temperature environments is to provide enough space for  
the material. Growth chambers and phytotron facilities lead to quicker and more  
precise results; however, small-sample testing leads to a loss in effective population  
 size. To deal with these limitations, some rice breeding programs use cold water  
under field conditions as a selection criterion, allowing the evaluation of many dif- 
ferent populations and thousands of plants per population (Snell et al. 2008). Several  
experimental stations in Japan (Okamoto et al.  1986; Horisue et al. 1988; Nagano  
 1998; Shinada et al. 2013), Bangladesh (Khatun et al. 2016), and Korea (Jeong et al.  
 1998) have successfully used cold water to screen rice breeding material for cold  
tolerance. Different traits depend on the developmental stage, which is used as an  
indicator  to  identify  cold-tolerant/susceptible  lines.  Some  correlation  studies  
revealed  that  varieties  having  germination  and  seedling  tolerance  under  low-  
temperature conditions might also be tolerant at the booting and flowering stages  
 (Ye et al. 2009). Inheritance and heritability of LTS tolerance at the germination  
 stage showed involvement of both additive and nonadditive gene actions, with the  
latter  component  relatively  more  important  for  coleoptile  length  and  coleoptile  
growth  decrease.  In  a  similar  kind  of  study,  epistatic  interaction  (a  nonadditive  
effect) was found to be important for rice germination capacity at low temperature.  
Some tolerance genes may be more important, whereas others are stage-specific. No  
 such genes have been demonstrated, which are responsible for cold tolerance over  
all the stages. 
    Selection for cold-tolerant genotypes in rice has shown a greater success rate due  
to  high  heritability  estimates  for  low-temperature  germinability  (Sthapit  and  
Witcombe  1998; da Cruz et al. 2006b). The nature and magnitude of gene action  
involved in different traits such as root and shoot length and plant stature are used  
as  indicators  under  cold  stress,  which  helps  in  devising  a  breeding  program  for  
developing cold-tolerant genotypes (Datta and Siddiq  1983; Kaw and Khush 1986;  
Acharya  1987). Involvement of two major genes, Cts1 and Cts2, has been reported  
at the vegetative stage responsible for cold tolerance and estimated through leaf yel- 
lowing (Kwak 1984) and withering (Nagamine 1991). On the other hand, studies of  

----------------------- Page 274-----------------------

Genetics and Breeding of Low-Temperature Stress Tolerance in Rice                                                    263 

Andaya and Tai (2006) reported cold tolerance at the vegetative stage as a complex  
trait involving multiple genes and, similarly, several major genes are involved in  
cold tolerance at the reproductive stage. Studies on correlating cold tolerance with  
morphological traits in temperate japonica  varieties show that tolerance is governed  
by four or more loci, which were shown to be linked to morphological marker genes  
(Futuhara and Toriyama 1966). It has been reported that several cold-tolerant culti- 
vars have already been released in different countries despite the complex genetic  
basis and difficulties and limitations of selection for cold tolerance (da Cruz et al.  
2013). These varieties may serve as a useful genetic repository rather than gene  
donors to develop cold tolerance in new rice varieties, which are lacking the trait.  
Much work on trait improvement resulted in 57% of the rice varieties in Korea hav- 
ing tolerance, and they are highly tolerant of low temperatures (Lee  2001). Each  
country developed its own strategy for breeding for cold tolerance. However, the  
main advances have been obtained within japonica  cultivars. Therefore, the chal- 
lenge  remains  to  develop  indica-type  cultivars  with  adequate  cold  tolerance  for  
high-latitude regions (Bierlen et al.  1997). An apparently simple solution could be  
to cross  indica genotypes with japonica  ones to transfer genes for cold tolerance  
from japonica . However, the differences between these two rice groups make it dif- 
ficult to maintain desirable indica characteristics, such as the cooking quality needed  
for consumer acceptance. Also, gene introgression from indica to japonica  rice has  
shown problems of high sterility and poor plant type with some linkage drag in the  
progenies (Khush 2005). Furthermore, overcoming the major constraints associated  
with conventional breeding for cold tolerance in rice has been of limited success  
with gene transfer from wild relatives (Flowers and Yeo 1995). Another difficulty in  
the selection of cold-tolerant varieties in field conditions is the lack of appropriate  
selection pressure, which provides critical stress-environment control (Blum 1988).  
Conventional breeding is an extremely slow process for generating varieties with  
improved  tolerance  of  stress  conditions.  In  addition,  incompatibility  in  wider  
crosses along with limited germplasm resources for stress tolerance is a major limi- 
tation  encountered  in  conventional  breeding.  Therefore,  integrating  traditional  
breeding programs with modern compatible molecular methods and elucidating the  
genetic mechanisms of this complex phenomenon will improve precision and speed  
in the development of genotypes with low-temperature tolerance. 

5.2       Improving LTS Tolerance by Selective Introgression  

The selective introgression breeding (SIB) strategy is a powerful tool for the simul- 
taneous improvement of tolerance and also to dissect complex traits. This is based  
on two approaches, such as developing a larger number of trait-specific introgres- 
sion lines via early backcross breeding and using a marker-facilitated approach to  
track the gene flow from donors to recipients. In addition to that, the selected early  
backcross breeding population can be used for identifying the genomic regions for  
the association of target traits of interest through QTL mapping (Pang et al. 2017;  

----------------------- Page 275-----------------------

264                                                                                                    S. Najeeb et al. 

Feng et al. 2018; Jewel et al. 2018). In the Green Super Rice (GSR) breeding pro- 
gram, this SIB strategy has laid the foundation for a better molecular and genetic  
understanding of complex traits in rice. This methodology provides more advan- 
tages than classical QTL mapping methods, such as decreasing the cost in genotyp- 
ing and phenotyping with selected lines, high statistical power to detect QTLs for  
targeted traits, and the selected lines are expected to carry the beneficial alleles of  
QTLs (Ali et al. 2017; Liang et al. 2018). By dissecting complex traits and develop- 
ing trait-specific introgression lines, Liang et al. (2018) successfully identified cold-  
tolerance QTLs on chromosomes 1, 2, 3, 4, 6, 9, 11, and 12. A total of 17 QTLs for  
cold tolerance at the reproductive stage were detected in 84 cold-tolerant introgres- 
sion lines (ILs) selected from five BC F  populations in a Chaoyou genetic back-2 4 
ground using a consensus linkage map. In addition, 310 random ILs from the same  
BC populations were used for dissecting the genetic networks underlying cold toler- 
ance by detecting QTLs and functional genetic units (FGUs). This study led to the  
discovery of QTLs qCT3.12, qCT6.7, and qCT9.6 that were validated in random BC  
populations. A QTL for LTG was fine-mapped by Shim et al. (2019) with the help  
of two introgression lines, TR5 and TR20, which were crossed to common parent  
Hwaseong  to  develop  F2:3  populations.  qLTG1  was  located  in  a  167-kb  region  
between two SSR markers (RM10310 and RM10326) and was found to harbor 18  
genes, with nine of them annotated with specific gene functions. The allelic effect at  
the qLTG1 locus was contributed by Oryza rufipogon that was observed to increase  
LTG and spikelets per panicle. 

5.3       Improving LTS Tolerance by Genetic Transformation  

Transgenic approaches can be used to improve cold tolerance in rice. These meth- 
ods  are  promising,  wherein  improvement  can  be  made  through  the  introduction  
from  across  trans-species  or  through  the  disruption  of  specific  DNA  sequences  
using RNAi technology. Gene expression analysis has made clear the physiological  
mechanisms responsible for tolerance against various abiotic stresses, including low  
temperature, in plants (Gao et al.  2008; Pan et al. 2020; Xu et al. 2020). Several  
chilling stress-responsive genes after their isolation and characterization have been  
found to encode proteins that act as enzymes for the biosynthesis of osmoprotec- 
tants. Transcription factors, especially those from the CBF/DREB1 family, play a  
more important role (Wang et al. 2008; Zhang et al. 2009; Su et al. 2010). Using the  
integrated  approach  of  T-DNA-tagged  rice  plants  and  inverse  PCR,  many  genes  
involved with several metabolic pathways were detected and characterized at the  
molecular level. When plants are exposed to cold stress, they show changes at the  
gene expression level, and the products of cold-inducible genes may either directly  
protect  against  cold  stress  or  further  regulate  the  expression  of  other  genes  
(Yamaguchi-Shinozaki  and  Shinozaki  2004;  Chen  et  al.  2008;  Su  et  al.  2010).  
Several  transgenic  rice  lines  or  overexpressed  lines  (OX)  have  been  developed,  
which  are  responsible  for  the  overexpression  of  cold-inducible  genes,  usually  

----------------------- Page 276-----------------------

Genetics and Breeding of Low-Temperature Stress Tolerance in Rice                                               265 

encoding TFs for the transcriptional regulation of these genes. The upregulated or  
overexpressed important genes/TFs with respect to their function, cold stress condi- 
tion, the phenotype of OX lines, and side effects in OX lines, if any, in comparison  
to  nontransformed  (WT)  plants,  are  described  in  Table  5.  Overexpression  of  
OsCTZFP8 in transgenic rice exhibited more cold-tolerant phenotypes than non- 
transgenic control plants by showing higher pollen fertility and seed-setting rate  
(Jin et al. 2018). The significant overexpression of cold-responsive genes and TFs  
suggests a practical utility of these genes at the field level requiring a systematic  
assessment, and this needs further use in crop improvement. 

5.4      Improving LTS Tolerance by Genome Editing  

Emerging  advanced  genome  editing  tools  (GETs)  such  as  zinc-finger  nucleases  
(ZFNs),  transcription  activator-like  effector  nucleases  (TALENs),  meganucleases  
(MNs), and CRISPR/Cas (clustered regularly interspaced short palindromic repeats/ 
CRISPR-associated protein) play a greater role in the understanding of the various  
biological functions by manipulating the desired target gene of interest and also  
providing new opportunities to create genetic diversity in various crops (Vats et al.  
2019; Wolter et al. 2019). However, these ZFNs, TALENs, and MNs are so expen- 
sive in the cloning procedure, have low target specificity, and are time-consuming  
and  laborious,  whereas  the  CRISPR/Cas  system  is  a  cheap,  easy-to-design,  and  
unique  tool  for  precise  and  efficient  genome  editing  at  the  single-base  level.  
CRISPR/Cas9 involves mainly single-guided RNA (sgRNA) in contrast to ZFNs  
and TALENs and provides mutagenesis at high frequency, thus increasing the num- 
ber of recombination sites and target specificity in plant genomes (Jaganathan et al.  
2018; Molla and Yang 2019). Currently, using this technology, several researchers  
have targeted genome editing for biotic and abiotic stress tolerance and also grain  
quality-related genes. Over the past decade, CRISPR/Cas9 has been widely used to  
produce novel rice varieties with improved target traits such as grain weight, panicle  
architecture,  aroma,  high  amylose  content,  and  tolerance  of  bacterial  blight  and  
blast, drought, and cold (Mishra et al. 2018; Fiaz et al. 2019; Jun et al. 2019). For  
instance, Li et al. (2016) edited four grain yield-related genes (Gn1a, DEP1, GS3,  
and IPA1) and Xu et al. (2016) edited three genes related to grain weight (GW2,  
GW5,  and  TGW6)  using  the  CRISPR/Cas9  system.  They  noticed  a  significant  
increase in phenotypic traits, such as increasing grain number and size, and dense  
erect panicles. In response to cold stress in rice, the CRISPR/Cas9 system was used  
to edit two TFs, TIFY1a (LOC_Os03g47970) and TIFY1b (LOC_Os03g52450), in  
rice, revealing single-base-pair insertion and deletion and also long fragment dele- 
tion. Thus, employing CRISPR/Cas9 technology to investigate the role of  TIFY1a  
and  TIFY1b  might  reveal  a  novel  pathway  that  controls  cold  adaptation  in  rice  
(Huang et al. 2017). CBFs have been studied in response to cold tolerance through  
genome editing, which has shown that CBF triple mutants were extremely sensitive  
to cold acclimation-dependent freezing stress (Jia et al. 2016). 

----------------------- Page 277-----------------------

266                                                                               S. Najeeb et al. 

    Breeding for LTS using conventional methods has met with limited success in  
improving tolerant rice varieties because of the lack of efficient selection criteria,  
the time-consuming work, and required expensive facilities for screening, and it  
also involves a multigenic trait. Therefore, an alternative breeding strategy such as  
genomic-assisted breeding and gene transformation technologies can provide a via- 
ble option to improve LTS tolerance in rice. The ability of the CRISPR/Cas9 system  
to  generate  transgene-free  genome-modified  plants,  create  site-specific  and  SNP  
mutations, and make large-scale changes in chromosome structure at the single and  
multicellular  levels  provides  a  comprehensive  target  trait  mechanism  and  more  
helpful breeding strategy to enhance biotic and abiotic stress tolerance in rice. The  
successful editing of important genes related to improving grain yield and quality  
traits has proven that this CRISPR/Cas9 technology could be a promising tool for  
understanding the molecular and physiological functional aspects of genes and TFs  
that influence target traits. 

6     Conclusions and Future Prospects 

This chapter has mainly focused on LTS-tolerance traits and associated genetics in  
rice, which have significant importance in tropical and temperate regions across the  
globe for increasing yield productivity and sustainability. The LTS tolerance-related  
QTLs, genes, enzymes, and their interactions are involved in stress-tolerance mech- 
anisms in different growth stages. In order to understand the interaction of genetics,  
physiological and metabolic responses to plants need to be analyzed using a growth-  
stage specific and precise phenotypic characterization. The LTS-tolerance trait asso- 
ciated with QTLs and genes will be useful in designing molecular breeding strategies  
for  improving  LTS  tolerance  in  rice  varieties.  The  combinational  approaches  of  
genomics and metabolomics are more interesting for phenotype prediction and are  
quite useful in breeding for stress tolerance. Selection based solely on genetic mark- 
ers  is  highly  biased  because  the  environment  profoundly  influences  most  of  the  
economic traits. The development of a metabolomics quantitative trait locus and  
metabolome-wide  association  studies  could  be  helpful  in  crop  improvement  by  
overcoming the problems emerging from differing environmental conditions during  
selection. This field will take advantage of the new plant genomes issued recently  
and of the modern and more powerful metabolite profiling tools (Dumas 2012; Wei  
et al.  2018). Some useful results at the metabolome level and the involvement of  
different metabolites in plant responses, as discussed above, have provided more  
insight into the complexity of cold-stress response. Even though this has extended  
our understanding of the molecular mechanisms of plant response to stresses, their  
reconfiguration under stresses is still quite complex because of the involvement of  
multiple molecular pathways (Guy et al. 2008). 
    However, in a breeding program for the development of LTS tolerance, advances  
in omics-related technologies have led to the development of well-planned pheno- 
typic  experiments  that  offer  deeper  insight  into  gene  function  along  with  gene  

----------------------- Page 278-----------------------

Genetics and Breeding of Low-Temperature Stress Tolerance in Rice                                   267 

effects  on  the  phenotype  in  a  specified  biological  context. There  is  a  significant  
positive correlation of LTS-tolerance traits among the different growth stages of  
rice, and this suggests that rice varieties with high germination rate and early seed- 
ling vigor-related traits under LTS conditions are also likely to be more tolerant in  
the reproductive stage (Ye et al. 2009). It is reasonable to consider that LTS-tolerant  
genotypes in the GS, SS, and RS may rely on the diverse genetic components of  
QTLs and genes on different chromosomes that are ensuring LTS tolerance. The  
rapid development of advanced genome sequencing and larger sets of polymorphic  
SNPs help in identifying potential candidate genes. Based on the comprehensive  
literature survey under LTS regarding GS-, SS-, and RS-specific traits and associ- 
ated with fine-tuned and colocalized stage-specific QTLs (in GS and SS), the high- 
est  numbers  of  QTLs  were  located  on  chromosomes  1  and  7  (Pan  et  al.  2015;  
Shakiba et al. 2017; Zhang et al. 2018; Sun et al. 2019). 
    Similarly, in three combinations of stage-specific QTLs (GS, SS, and RS) associ- 
ated with multiple traits on chromosome 10 (Li et al. 2013; Pan et al. 2015; Schläppi  
et al. 2017), seven genetic regions are colocalized with candidate genes and QTLs  
on four chromosomes (1, 3, 5, and 6), and this provides insights into identifying the  
candidate  genes  and  developing  functional  allele-specific  markers  for  improving  
LTS tolerance in breeding programs. The concept of omics studies has amassed a  
great deal of information at the transcript, protein, and metabolite levels to perceive  
the tolerance mechanisms of plants under stress. To fully understand the complex  
regulatory nature of plants against stresses, a highly coordinated approach such as  
systems biology needs to be identified. Unfortunately, the integration of data out- 
puts from phenomes, transcriptomes, proteomes, and metabolomes has been found  
to be inefficient and ineffective yet, despite the marvelous progress shown in bioin- 
formatics. However, future approaches need to integrate these through robust com- 
puting platforms that should be able to predict the active biochemical and molecular  
genetic networks to exploit LTS tolerance in rice breeding. This could potentially  
lead to detecting and identifying master stress regulators to target the right biomark- 
ers for improving rice LTS tolerance effectively. 

Acknowledgments   The authors would like to thank and acknowledge the Bill & Melinda Gates  
Foundation  for  providing  a  research  grant  to  ZL  for  the  Green  Super  Rice  project  under  ID  
OPP1130530. We would also like to thank the Department of Agriculture, Philippines, for provid- 
ing funds to JA under the Next-Gen project, and also thank and acknowledge IRRI Communications  
for English language editing and anonymous internal reviewers for their valuable suggestions and  
constructive comments that helped improve this manuscript. 

References 

Acharya S (1987) Genetic parameters and their implication in breeding cold tolerant varieties of  
    rice (Oryza sativa L.). Crop Improv 14:100–103 
Ali AJ, Xu JL, Ismail AM et al (2006) Hidden diversity for abiotic and biotic stress tolerances in  
    the primary gene pool of rice revealed by a large backcross breeding program. Field Crop Res  
    97:66–76 

----------------------- Page 279-----------------------

268                                                                                  S. Najeeb et al. 

Ali J, Xu J-L, Gao Y-M et al (2017) Harnessing the hidden genetic diversity for improving multiple  
    abiotic stress tolerance in rice (Oryza sativa L.). PLoS One 12:e0172515 
Almeida DM, Almadanim MC, Lourenço T et al (2016) Screening for abiotic stress tolerance in  
    rice: salt, cold, and drought. In: Environmental responses in plants. Springer, New York, NY,  
    pp 155–182 
Andaya V, Mackill D (2003a) QTLs conferring cold tolerance at the booting stage of rice using  
    recombinant inbred lines from a japonica × indica cross. Theor Appl Genet 106:1084–1090 
Andaya VC, Mackill DJ (2003b) Mapping of QTLs associated with cold tolerance during the veg- 
    etative stage in rice. J Exp Bot 54:2579–2585. https://doi.org/10.1093/jxb/erg243 
Andaya VC, Tai TH (2006) Fine mapping of the  qCTS12 locus, a major QTL for seedling cold  
    tolerance in rice. Theor Appl Genet 113:467–475 
Araújo WL, Trofimova L, Mkrtchyan G et al (2013) On the role of the mitochondrial 2- oxoglutarate  
    dehydrogenase complex in amino acid metabolism. Amino Acids 44:683–700 
Arbona V, Manzi M, de Ollas C, Gómez-Cadenas A (2013) Metabolomics as a tool to investigate  
    abiotic stress tolerance in plants. Int J Mol Sci 14:4885–4911 
Asakura T, Nakaizumi T, Hirose S et al (2004) Proteome analysis of the regulation of rice seed  
    germination. In: Plant and cell physiology. Oxford University Press, Oxford, pp s148–s148 
Bai B, Wu J, Sheng W-T et al (2015) Comparative analysis of anther transcriptome profiles of two  
    different rice male sterile lines genotypes under cold stress. Int J Mol Sci 16:11398–11416 
Basuchaudhuri P (2014) Cold tolerance in rice cultivation. CRC Press, Boca Raton, FL 
Bertin P, Kinet JM, Bouharmont J (1996) Evaluation of chilling sensitivity in different rice vari- 
    eties: relationship between screening procedures applied during germination and vegetative  
    growth. Euphytica 89:201–210 
Bevilacqua CB, Basu S, Pereira A et al (2015) Analysis of stress-responsive gene expression in  
    cultivated and weedy rice differing in cold stress tolerance. PLoS One 10:e0132100 
Bierlen R, Wailes EJ, Cramer GL (1997) The mercosur rice economy. Ark Exp Stat Bull 954:1–58 
Biswas PS, Khatun H, Das N et al (2017) Mapping and validation of QTLs for cold tolerance at  
    seedling stage in rice from an indica cultivar Habiganj Boro VI (Hbj.BVI). 3 Biotech 7:359.  
    https://doi.org/10.1007/s13205- 017- 0993- 1 
Blum A (1988) Plant breeding for stress environments. CRC Press, Boca Raton, FL. 223 p 
Board JE, Peterson ML, Ng E (1980) Floret sterility in rice in a cool environment. 1. Agron J  
    72:483–487 
Bonnecarrère V, Borsani O, Díaz P et al (2011) Response to photoxidative stress induced by cold  
    in japonica rice is genotype dependent. Plant Sci 180:726–732 
Bonnecarrere V, Quero G, Monteverde E et al (2015) Candidate gene markers associated with cold  
    tolerance in vegetative stage of rice (Oryza sativa L.). Euphytica 203:385–398 
Bowne JB, Erwin TA, Juttner J et al (2012) Drought responses of leaf tissues from wheat cultivars  
    of differing drought tolerance at the metabolite level. Mol Plant 5:418–429 
Chen L, Qiaojun L, Sun ZX et al (2006a) QTL mapping of low temperature germinability in rice.  
    Zhongguo Shuidao Kexue 20:159–164 
Chen L, Qiaojun L, Sun ZX et al (2006b) QTL mapping of low temperature on germination rate  
    of rice. Rice Sci 13:93–98 
Chen  JQ,  Meng  XP,  Zhang  Y  et  al  (2008)  Over-expression  of  OsDREB  genes  lead  to  
    enhanced  drought  tolerance  in  rice.  Biotechnol  Lett  30:2191–2198.  https://doi.org/10.1007/ 
    s10529- 008- 9811- 5 
Chen NA, Xu Y, Wang XIN et al (2011) OsRAN2, essential for mitosis, enhances cold tolerance in  
    rice by promoting export of intranuclear tubulin and maintaining cell division under cold stress.  
    Plant Cell Environ 34:52–64 
Chen J, Lin T, Xu H et al (2012) Cold-induced changes of protein and phosphoprotein expression  
    patterns from rice roots as revealed by multiplex proteomic analysis. Plant Omics 5:194 
Cheng L, Wang J, Uzokwe V et al (2012) Genetic analysis of cold tolerance at seedling stage and  
    heat tolerance at anthesis in rice (Oryza sativa L.). J Integr Agric 11:359–367 

----------------------- Page 280-----------------------

Genetics and Breeding of Low-Temperature Stress Tolerance in Rice                                    269 

Chinnusamy V, Ohta M, Kanrar S et al (2003) ICE1: a regulator of cold-induced transcriptome and  
    freezing tolerance in Arabidopsis . Genes Dev 17:1043–1054 
Chinnusamy V, Zhu J, Zhu J-K (2007) Cold stress regulation of gene expression in plants. Trends  
    Plant Sci 12:444–451 
Chinnusamy V, Zhu JK, Sunkar R (2010) Gene regulation during cold stress acclimation in plants.  
    In: Plant stress tolerance. Springer, New York, NY, pp 39–55 
Chou WL, Huang LF, Fang JC et al (2014) Divergence of the expression and subcellular localiza- 
    tion of CCR4-associated factor 1 (CAF1) deadenylase proteins in Oryza sativa. Plant Mol Biol  
    85:443–458. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11103- 014- 0196- 7 
Colebrook EH, Thomas SG, Phillips AL, Hedden P (2014) The role of gibberellin signalling in  
    plant responses to abiotic stress. J Exp Biol 217:67–75 
da  Cruz  RP,  Milach  SCK  (2000)  Breeding  for  cold  tolerance  in  irrigated  rice.  Ciência  Rural  
    30:909–917 
da Cruz RP, Milach SCK (2004) Cold tolerance at the germination stage of rice: methods of evalu- 
    ation and characterization of genotypes. Sci Agric 61:1–8 
da Cruz RP, Milach SCK, Federizzi LC (2006a) Rice cold tolerance at the reproductive stage in a  
    controlled environment. Sci Agric 63:255–261 
da Cruz RP, Milach SCK, Federizzi LC et al (2006b) Inheritance of rice cold tolerance at the ger- 
    mination stage. Genet Mol Biol 29:314–320 
da Cruz RP, Duarte ITL, Cabreira C (2010) Inheritance of rice cold tolerance at the seedling stage.  
    Sci Agric (Piracicaba, Braz) 67:669–674. https://doi.org/10.1590/S0103- 90162010000600008 
da Cruz RP, Sperotto RA, Cargnelutti D et al (2013) Avoiding damage and achieving cold toler- 
    ance in rice plants. Food Energ Secur 2:96–119. https://doi.org/10.1002/fes3.25 
Cui S, Huang F, Wang J et al (2005) A proteomic analysis of cold stress responses in rice seedlings.  
    Proteomics 5:3162–3172 
Cui Y, Zhang F, Zhou Y (2018) The application of multi-locus GWAS for the detection of salt-  
    tolerance loci in rice. Front Plant Sci 9:1464 
Dai L, Lin X, Ye C et al (2004) Identification of quantitative trait loci controlling cold tolerance at  
    the reproductive stage in Yunnan landrace of rice, Kunmingxiaobaigu. Breed Sci 54:253–258 
Datta D, Siddiq EA (1983) Genetic analysis of cold tolerance at seedling phase in rice. Indian J  
    Genet Plant Breed 43:345–349 
Ding Y, Shi Y, Yang S (2019) Advances and challenges in uncovering cold tolerance regulatory  
    mechanisms in plants. New Phytol 222:1690–1704 
Doherty CJ, Van Buskirk HA, Myers SJ, Thomashow MF (2009) Roles for Arabidopsis CAMTA  
    transcription  factors  in  cold-regulated  gene  expression  and  freezing  tolerance.  Plant  Cell  
    21:972–984 
Donoso G, Cabas P, Paredes M et al (2015) Cold tolerance evaluation of temperate rice (Oryza  
    sativa L. ssp. japonica ) genotypes at seedling stage. Gayana Bot 72:1–13 
Dumas M-E (2012) Metabolome 2.0: quantitative genetics and network biology of metabolic phe- 
    notypes. Mol BioSyst 8:2494–2502 
Farrell  T,  Fox  KM,  Williams  RL  et  al  (2001)  Temperature  constraints  to  rice  production  in  
    Australia and Laos: a shared problem. In: Increased lowland rice production in the mekong  
    region. Australian Centre for International Agricultural Research, Canberra, ACT, pp 129–137 
Feng B, Chen K, Cui Y et al (2018) Genetic dissection and simultaneous improvement of drought  
    and low nitrogen tolerances by designed QTL pyramiding in rice. Front Plant Sci 9:306. https:// 
    doi.org/10.3389/fpls.2018.00306 
Fiaz S, Ahmad S, Noor MA et al (2019) Applications of the CRISPR/Cas9 system for rice grain  
    quality improvement: perspectives and opportunities. Int J Mol Sci 20:888 
Flowers TJ, Yeo AR (1995) Breeding for salinity resistance in crop plants: where next? Funct Plant  
    Biol 22:875–884 
Fournier ML, Gilmore JM, Martin-Brown SA, Washburn MP (2007) Multidimensional separations-  
    based shotgun proteomics. Chem Rev 107:3654–3686 

----------------------- Page 281-----------------------

270                                                                                     S. Najeeb et al. 

Fujino K, Matsuda Y (2010) Genome-wide analysis of genes targeted by qLTG3-1 controlling  
    low-temperature germinability in rice. Plant Mol Biol 72:137 
Fujino K, Sekiguchi H (2011) Origins of functional nucleotide polymorphisms in a major quan- 
    titative  trait  locus,  qLTG3-1,  controlling  low-temperature  germinability  in  rice.  Plant  Mol  
    Biol 75:1–10 
Fujino K, Sekiguchi H, Sato T et al (2004) Mapping of quantitative trait loci controlling low-  
    temperature germinability in rice (Oryza sativa L.). Theor Appl Genet 108:794–799 
Fujino K, Sekiguchi H, Matsuda Y et al (2008) Molecular identification of a major quantitative  
    trait locus, qLTG3-1, controlling low-temperature germinability in rice. Proc Natl Acad Sci U  
    S A 105:12623–12628. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0805303105 
Fursova OV, Pogorelko GV, Tarasov VA (2009) Identification of ICE2, a gene involved in cold  
    acclimation which determines freezing tolerance in Arabidopsis thaliana . Gene 429:98–103 
Futuhara Y, Toriyama K (1966) Genetic studies on cool tolerance in rice: III. Linkage relations  
    between genes controlling cool tolerance and marker genes of NAGAO and TAKAHASHI. Jpn  
    J Breed 16:231–242 
Gao JP, Chao DY, Lin HX (2008) Toward understanding molecular mechanisms of abiotic stress  
    responses in rice. Rice 1:36–51 
Garbarino JE, Hurkman WJ, Tanaka CK, DuPont FM (1991) In vitro and in vivo phosphorylation  
    of polypeptides in plasma membrane and tonoplast-enriched fractions from barley roots. Plant  
    Physiol 95:1219–1228 
Garg AK, Kim J-K, Owens TG et al (2002) Trehalose accumulation in rice plants confers high  
    tolerance levels to different abiotic stresses. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 99:15898–15903 
Gautam A, Suresh J, Gudade BA et al (2018) Rice: grappling with cold under climatic changes,  
    global impact and counter strategies. Adv Res 13:1–9 
Ge L-F, Chao D-Y, Shi M et al (2008) Overexpression of the trehalose-6-phosphate phosphatase  
    gene OsTPP1 confers stress tolerance in rice and results in the activation of stress responsive  
    genes. Planta 228:191–201 
Ghosh T, Rai M, Tyagi W, Challam C (2016) Seedling stage low temperature response in tolerant  
    and susceptible rice genotypes suggests role of relative water content and members of OsSNAC  
    gene family. Plant Signal Behav 11:1–5. https://doi.org/10.1080/15592324.2016.1138192 
Gilmour SJ, Sebolt AM, Salazar MP et al (2000) Overexpression of the Arabidopsis CBF3 tran- 
    scriptional activator mimics multiple biochemical changes associated with cold acclimation.  
    Plant Physiol 124:1854–1865 
Gilmour  SJ,  Fowler  SG,  Thomashow  MF  (2004) Arabidopsis  transcriptional  activators  CBF1,  
    CBF2, and CBF3 have matching functional activities. Plant Mol Biol 54:767–781 
Gothandam KM, Nalini E, Karthikeyan S, Shin JS (2010) OsPRP3, a flower specific proline-rich  
    protein of rice, determines extracellular matrix structure of floral organs and its overexpression  
    confers cold-tolerance. Plant Mol Biol 72:125 
Greco M, Chiappetta A, Bruno L, Bitonti MB (2012) In Posidonia oceanica cadmium induces  
    changes in DNA methylation and chromatin patterning. J Exp Bot 63(2):695–709 
Gupta  BB,  Salgotra  RK,  Bali  AS  (2009)  Status  paper  on  rice  in  Jammu  and  Kashmir.  Rice  
    Knowledge Management Portal (RKMP), Hyderabad. http://www.rkmp.co.in/ 
Gururani MA, Venkatesh J, Ganesan M et al (2015) In vivo assessment of cold tolerance through  
    chlorophyll-a fluorescence in transgenic zoysiagrass expressing mutant phytochrome A. PLoS  
    One 10:1–17. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0127200 
Guy  C,  Kaplan  F,  Kopka  J  et  al  (2008)  Metabolomics  of  temperature  stress.  Physiol  Plant  
    132:220–235 
Han LZ, Qiao YL, Cao GL et al (2004) QTLs analysis of cold tolerance during early growth period  
    for rice. Rice Sci 11:245–250 
Han LZ, Zhang YY, Qiao YL et al (2006) Genetic and QTL analysis for low-temperature vigor of  
    germination in rice. Acta Genet Sin 33:998–1006 
Hashimoto  M,  Komatsu  S  (2007)  Proteomic  analysis  of  rice  seedlings  during  cold  stress.  
    Proteomics 7:1293–1302 

----------------------- Page 282-----------------------

Genetics and Breeding of Low-Temperature Stress Tolerance in Rice                                   271 

Horisue N, Kunihiro Y, Higashi T et al (1988) Screening for cold tolerance of Chinese and Japanese  
    rice varieties and selection of standard varieties. Trop Agric Res Ser 21:76–87 
Hou MY, Jiang L, Wang CM, Wan JM (2003) Detection and analysis of QTLs for low temperature  
    germinability in rice (Oryza sativa L.). Rice Genet Newsl 20:52–55 
Hu H, You J, Fang Y et al (2008) Characterization of transcription factor gene SNAC2 conferring  
    cold and salt tolerance in rice. Plant Mol Biol 67:169–181 
Huang J, Sun S, Xu D et al (2012) A TFIIIA-type zinc finger protein confers multiple abiotic stress  
    tolerances in transgenic rice (Oryza sativa L.). Plant Mol Biol 80:337–350 
Huang X, Zeng X, Li J, Zhao D (2017) Construction and analysis of  tify1a and  tify1b mutants  
    in rice (Oryza sativa) based on CRISPR/Cas9 technology. J Agric Biotechnol 25:1003–1012 
Hussain HA, Hussain S, Khaliq A et al (2018) Chilling and drought stresses in crop plants: impli- 
    cations, cross talk, and potential management opportunities. Front Plant Sci 9:393 
Ito Y,  Katsura  K,  Maruyama  K  et  al  (2006)  Functional  analysis  of  rice  DREB1/CBF-type  
    transcription factors involved in cold-responsive gene expression in transgenic rice. Plant  
    Cell Physiol 47:141–153. https://doi.org/10.1093/pcp/pci230 
Jaganathan D, Ramasamy K, Sellamuthu G et al (2018) CRISPR for crop improvement: an update  
    review. Front Plant Sci 9:985 
Jena KK, Kim SM, Suh JP et al (2012) Identification of cold-tolerant breeding lines by quantitative  
    trait loci associated with cold tolerance in rice. Crop Sci 52:517–523 
Jeong EG, Baek MK, Yea JD et al (1998) Screening of characters related to cold tolerance of  
    Korean leading rice varieties. RDA J Crop Sci 40:25 
Jewel Z, Ali J, Pang Y et al (2018) Developing green super rice varieties with high nutrient use  
    efficiency by phenotypic selection under varied nutrient conditions. Crop J 7:368–377. https:// 
    doi.org/10.1016/j.cj.2019.01.002 
Ji SL, Jiang L, Wang YH et al (2008) QTL and epistasis for low temperature germinability in rice.  
    Acta Agron Sin 34:551–556 
Ji H, Kim SR, Kim YH et al (2010a) Inactivation of the CTD phosphatase-like gene  OsCPL1  
    enhances the development of the abscission layer and seed shattering in rice. Plant J 61:96–106.  
    https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1365- 313X.2009.04039.x 
Ji ZJ, Zeng YX, Zeng DI et al (2010b) Identification of QTLs for rice cold tolerance at plumule  
    and 3-leaf-seedling stages by using QTLNetwork software. Rice Sci 17:282–287. https://doi. 
    org/10.1016/S1672- 6308(09)60028- 7 
Ji X, Dong B, Shiran B et al (2011) Control of abscisic acid catabolism and abscisic acid homeo- 
    stasis is important for reproductive stage stress tolerance in cereals. Plant Physiol 156:647–662 
Jia Y, Ding Y, Shi Y et al (2016) The  cbfs triple mutants reveal the essential functions of  CBFs  
    in  cold  acclimation  and  allow  the  definition  of  CBF  regulons  in  Arabidopsis .  New  Phytol  
    212:345–353 
Jiang L, Xun M, Wang J, Wan J (2008) QTL analysis of cold tolerance at seedling stage in rice  
    (Oryza sativa L.) using recombination inbred lines. J Cereal Sci 48:173–179 
Jiang Y,  Cai  Z,  Xie W  et  al  (2012)  Rice  functional  genomics  research:  progress  and  implica- 
    tions for crop genetic improvement. Biotechnol Adv 30:1059–1070. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
    biotechadv.2011.08.013 
Jiang N, Shi S, Shi H et al (2017) Mapping QTL for seed germinability under low temperature  
    using a new high-density genetic map of rice. Front Plant Sci 8:1–9. https://doi.org/10.3389/ 
    fpls.2017.01223 
Jin YM, Piao R, Yan YF et al (2018) Overexpression of a new zinc finger protein transcription fac- 
    tor OsCTZFP8 improves cold tolerance in rice. Int J Genom 23:5480617 
Joo J, Lee YH, Kim Y et al (2013) Abiotic stress responsive rice ASR1 and ASR3 exhibit dif- 
    ferent  tissue-dependent  sugar  and  hormone-sensitivities.  Mol  Cell  35:421–435.  https://doi. 
    org/10.1007/s10059- 013- 0036- 7 
Jun REN, Xixun HU, Kejian W, Chun W (2019) Development and application of CRISPR/Cas  
    system in rice. Rice Sci 26:69–76 

----------------------- Page 283-----------------------

272                                                                                      S. Najeeb et al. 

Kanneganti V, Gupta AK (2008) Overexpression of OsiSAP8, a member of stress associated pro- 
    tein (SAP) gene family of rice confers tolerance to salt, drought and cold stress in transgenic  
    tobacco and rice. Plant Mol Biol 66:445–462 
Kasuga  M,  Miura  S,  Shinozaki  K,  Yamaguchi-Shinozaki  K  (2004)  A  combination  of  the  
    Arabidopsis DREB1A gene and stress-inducible rd29A promoter improved drought- and low-  
    temperature stress tolerance in tobacco by gene transfer. Plant Cell Physiol 45:346–350 
Kaw  RN,  Khush  GS  (1986)  Combining  ability  for  low-temperature  tolerance  in  rice.  In:  Rice  
    genetics I (in two parts). World Scientific, Singapore, pp 593–612 
Kawamura Y,  Uemura  M  (2003)  Mass  spectrometric  approach  for  identifying  putative  plasma  
    membrane proteins of Arabidopsis leaves associated with cold acclimation. Plant J 36:141–154 
Khatun H, Biswas PS, Hwang HG, Kim K-M (2016) A quick and simple in-house screening proto- 
    col for cold tolerance at seedling stage in rice. Plant Breed Biotechnol 4:373–378 
Khush GS (2005) What it will take to feed 5.0 billion rice consumers in 2030. Plant Mol Biol 59:1–6 
Kim S-I, Tai TH (2011) Evaluation of seedling cold tolerance in rice cultivars: a comparison of  
    visual ratings and quantitative indicators of physiological changes. Euphytica 178:437–447 
Kim S-I, Tai TH (2013) Identification of SNPs in closely related Temperate Japonica rice cultivars  
    using restriction enzyme-phased sequencing. PLoS One 8:e60176 
Kim S-H, Kim J-Y, Kim S-J et al (2007) Isolation of cold stress-responsive genes in the reproduc- 
    tive organs, and characterization of the  OsLti6b gene from rice (Oryza sativa L.). Plant Cell  
    Rep 26:1097–1110 
Kim S-J, Lee S-C, Hong SK et al (2009) Ectopic expression of a cold-responsive OsAsr1 cDNA  
    gives enhanced cold tolerance in transgenic rice plants. Mol Cell 27:449–458 
Kim S-MM, Suh J-PP, Lee C-KK et al (2014) QTL mapping and development of candidate gene-  
    derived DNA markers associated with seedling cold tolerance in rice (Oryza sativa L.). Mol  
    Gen Genomics 289:333–343. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00438- 014- 0813- 9 
Koh S, Lee SC, Kim MK et al (2007) T-DNA tagged knockout mutation of rice OsGSK1, an ortho- 
    logue of Arabidopsis BIN2, with enhanced tolerance to various abiotic stresses. Plant Mol Biol  
    65:453–466. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11103- 007- 9213- 4 
Komatsu  S,  Karibe  H,  Hamada  T,  Rakwal  R  (1999)  Phosphorylation  upon  cold  stress  in  rice  
    (Oryza sativa L.) seedlings. Theor Appl Genet 98:1304–1310 
Komatsu S, Yang G, Khan M et al (2007) Over-expression of calcium-dependent protein kinase  
    13  and  calreticulin  interacting  protein  1  confers  cold  tolerance  on  rice  plants.  Mol  Gen  
    Genomics 277:713 
Koseki M, Kitazawa N, Yonebayashi S et al (2010) Identification and fine mapping of a major  
    quantitative trait locus originating from wild rice, controlling cold tolerance at the seedling  
    stage. Mol Gen Genomics 284:45–54 
Kuk YI, Shin JS, Burgos NR et al (2003) Antioxidative enzymes offer protection from chilling  
    damage in rice plants. Crop Sci 43:2109–2117 
Kumar K, Rao KP, Sharma P, Sinha AK (2008) Differential regulation of rice mitogen activated  
    protein kinase kinase (MKK) by abiotic stress. Plant Physiol Biochem 46:891–897. https://doi. 
    org/10.1016/j.plaphy.2008.05.014 
Kuroki M, Saito K, Matsuba S et al (2007) A quantitative trait locus for cold tolerance at the boot- 
    ing stage on rice chromosome 8. Theor Appl Genet 115:593–600 
Kuroki M, Saito K, Matsuba S (2009) Quantitative trait locus analysis for cold tolerance at the  
    booting stage in a rice cultivar, Hatsushizuku. Jpn Agric Res Q 43:115–121 
Kwak TS (1984) Inheritance of seedling cold tolerance in rice. SABRAO J 16:83–86 
Lee M-H (2001) Low temperature tolerance in rice: the Korean experience. In: ACIAR Proceedings  
    1998. ACIAR, Canberra, ACT, pp 109–117 
Lee T, Lur H, Chu C (1993) Role of abscisic acid in chilling tolerance of rice (Oryza sativa L.)  
    seedlings. I. Endogenous abscisic acid levels. Plant Cell Environ 16:481–490 
Lee DG, Ahsan N, Lee SH et al (2009a) Chilling stress-induced proteomic changes in rice roots.  
    J Plant Physiol 166:1–11 

----------------------- Page 284-----------------------

Genetics and Breeding of Low-Temperature Stress Tolerance in Rice                                273 

Lee SJ, Jeon US, Lee SJ et al (2009b) Iron fortification of rice seeds through activation of the  
    nicotianamine  synthase  gene.  Proc  Natl  Acad  Sci  U  S  A  106:22014–22019.  https://doi. 
    org/10.4324/9780203605912 
Lee J, Lee W, Kwon S-W (2015) A quantitative shotgun proteomics analysis of germinated rice  
    embryos and coleoptiles under low-temperature conditions. Proteome Sci 13:27 
Lee J, Heath LS, Grene R, Li S (2019) Comparing time series transcriptome data between plants  
    using a network module finding algorithm. Plant Methods 15:61 
Li HB, Wang J, Liu AM et al (1997) Genetic basis of low-temperature-sensitive sterility in indica-  
   japonica hybrids of rice as determined by RFLP analysis. Theor Appl Genet 95:1092–1097 
Li G, Zhang M, Cai W-M et al (2008) Characterization of OsPIP2;7, a water channel protein in  
    rice. Plant Cell Physiol 49:1851–1858. https://doi.org/10.1093/pcp/pcn166 
Li HW, Zang BS, Deng XW, Wang XP (2011a) Overexpression of the trehalose-6-phosphate syn- 
    thase gene OsTPS1 enhances abiotic stress tolerance in rice. Planta 234:1007–1018. https://doi. 
    org/10.1007/s00425- 011- 1458- 0 
Li M, Sun P, Zhou H (2011b) Identification of quantitative trait loci associated with germination  
    using  chromosome  segment  substitution  lines  of  rice  (Oryza  sativa  L.).  Theor Appl  Genet  
    123:411–420. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00122- 011- 1593- 9 
Li L, Liu X, Xie K et al (2013) qLTG-9, a stable quantitative trait locus for low-temperature ger- 
    mination in rice (Oryza sativa L.). Theor Appl Genet 126:2313–2322 
Li M, Li X, Zhou Z et al (2016) Reassessment of the four yield-related genes Gn1a, DEP1, GS3,  
    and IPA1 in rice using a CRISPR/Cas9 system. Front Plant Sci 7:377 
Li S, Tian Y, Wu K et al (2018) Modulating plant growth–metabolism coordination for sustainable  
    agriculture. Nature 560:595. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586- 018- 0415- 5 
Liang Y, Meng L, Lin X et al (2018) QTL and QTL networks for cold tolerance at the reproductive  
    stage detected using selective introgression in rice. PLoS One 13:e0200846 
Liu K, Wang L, Xu Y et al (2007) Overexpression of OsCOIN, a putative cold inducible zinc finger  
    protein, increased tolerance to chilling, salt and drought, and enhanced proline level in rice.  
    Planta 226:1007–1016. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00425- 007- 0548- 5 
Liu C, Wu Y, Wang X (2012) bZIP transcription factor  OsbZIP52/RISBZ5: a potential negative  
    regulator of cold and drought stress response in rice. Planta 235:1157–1169 
Liu F, Xu W, Song Q et al (2013) Microarray-assisted fine-mapping of quantitative trait loci for  
    cold tolerance in rice. Mol Plant 6:757–767 
Lone JA, Khan MN, Bhat MA et al (2018) Cold tolerance at germination and seedling stages of  
    rice: methods of evaluation and characterization of thirty rice genotypes under stress condi- 
    tions. Int J Curr Microbiol App Sci 7:1103–1109 
Lou Q, Chen L, Sun Z et al (2007) A major QTL associated with cold tolerance at seedling stage  
    in rice (Oryza sativa L.). Euphytica 158:87–94. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10681- 007- 9431- 5 
Lourenço T, Sapeta H, Figueiredo DD et al (2013) Isolation and characterization of rice (Oryza  
    sativa L.) E3-ubiquitin ligase  OsHOS1 gene in the modulation of cold stress response. Plant  
    Mol Biol 83:351–363 
Ma Q, Dai X, Xu Y et al (2009) Enhanced tolerance to chilling stress in  OsMYB3R-2 transgenic  
    rice is mediated by alteration in cell cycle and ectopic expression of stress genes. Plant Physiol  
    150:244–256 
Ma Y, Dai X, Xu Y et al (2015) COLD1 confers chilling tolerance in rice. Cell 160:1209–1221 
Maraña C, García Olmedo F, Carbonero Zalduegui P (1990) Differential expression of two types  
    of sucrose synthase-encoding genes in wheat in response to anaerobiosis, cold shock and light.  
    Gene 88:167–172 
Matlon P, Randolph T, Guei R (1998) Impact of rice research in West Africa. In: Impact of rice  
    research. International Rice Research Institute, Los Baños, pp 383–404 
Mishra R, Joshi RK, Zhao K (2018) Genome editing in rice: recent advances, challenges, and  
    future implications. Front Plant Sci 9:1361 
Miura K, Lin SY, Yano M, Nagamine T (2001) Mapping quantitative trait loci controlling low  
    temperature germinability in rice (Oryza sativa L.). Breed Sci 51:293–299 

----------------------- Page 285-----------------------

274                                                                                      S. Najeeb et al. 

Mohanty S, Wassmann R, Nelson A et al (2012) Rice and climate change: significance for food  
    security and vulnerability. IRRI discussion paper series No. 49. International Rice Research  
    Institute, Los Baños. 14 p 
Molla KA, Yang Y (2019) CRISPR/Cas-mediated base editing: technical considerations and prac- 
    tical applications. Trends Biotechnol 37:1121–1142 
Moraes De Freitas GP, Basu S, Ramegowda V et al (2016) Comparative analysis of gene expres- 
    sion  in  response  to  cold  stress  in  diverse  rice  genotypes.  Biochem  Biophys  Res  Commun  
    471:253–259. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bbrc.2016.02.004 
Morsy MR, Almutairi AM, Gibbons J et al (2005) The  OsLti6 genes encoding low-molecular-  
    weight membrane proteins are differentially expressed in rice cultivars with contrasting sensi- 
    tivity to low temperature. Gene 344:171–180 
Morsy MR, Jouve L, Hausman J-F et al (2007) Alteration of oxidative and carbohydrate metabo- 
    lism under abiotic stress in two rice (Oryza sativa L.) genotypes contrasting in chilling toler- 
    ance. J Plant Physiol 164:157–167 
Mukhopadhyay A, Vij S, Tyagi AK (2004) Overexpression of a zinc-finger protein gene from rice  
    confers tolerance to cold, dehydration, and salt stress in transgenic tobacco. Proc Natl Acad Sci  
    U S A 101:6309–6314 
Murai-Hatano M, Kuwagata T, Sakurai J et al (2008) Effect of low root temperature on hydraulic  
    conductivity of rice plants and the possible role of aquaporins. Plant Cell Physiol 49:1294–1305 
Nagamine T (1991) Genic control of tolerance to chilling injury at seedling stage in rice,  Oryza  
    sativa L. Jpn J Breed 41:35–40 
Nagano K (1998) Development of new breeding techniques for cold tolerance and breeding of  
    new rice cultivars with highly cold tolerance, Hitomebore and Jyoudeki. In: Proceedings of  
    the International Workshop on Breeding and Biotechnology for Environmental Stress in Rice,  
    pp 143–148 
Nakashima K, Tran LP, Van Nguyen D et al (2007) Functional analysis of a NAC-type transcrip- 
    tion factor OsNAC6 involved in abiotic and biotic stress-responsive gene expression in rice.  
    Plant J 51:617–630 
Nalley L, Tack J, Durand A et al (2017) The production, consumption, and environmental impacts  
    of  rice  hybridization  in  the  United  States.  Agron  J  109:193–203.  https://doi.org/10.2134/ 
    agronj2016.05.0281 
Novillo  F, Alonso  JM,  Ecker  JR,  Salinas  J  (2004)  CBF2/DREB1C  is  a  negative  regulator  of  
    CBF1/DREB1B and CBF3/DREB1A expression and plays a central role in stress tolerance in  
    Arabidopsis . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 101:3985–3990 
Oh SJ, Kim YS, Kwon CW et al (2009) Overexpression of the transcription factor AP37 in rice  
    improves grain yield under drought conditions. Plant Physiol 150:1368–1379 
Okamoto E, Matsunaga K, Sasaki T (1986) Cold tolerant rice varieties in temperate district of  
    Japan. Tohoku Agric Res 39:35 
Oliver SN, Van Dongen JT, Alfred SC et al (2005) Cold-induced repression of the rice anther-  
    specific cell wall invertase gene OSINV4 is correlated with sucrose accumulation and pollen  
    sterility. Plant Cell Environ 28:1534–1551 
Oliver SN, Zhao X, Dennis ES, Dolferus R (2007) The molecular basis of cold-induced pollen  
    sterility  in  rice.  In:  Biotechnology  and  sustainable  agriculture  2006  and  beyond.  Springer,  
    New York, NY, pp 205–207 
Pan Y, Zhang H, Zhang D et al (2015) Genetic analysis of cold tolerance at the germination and  
    booting stages in rice by association mapping. PLoS One 10:e0120590. https://doi.org/10.1371/ 
    journal.pone.0120590 
Pan Y, Liang H, Gao L et al (2020) Transcriptomic profiling of germinating seeds under cold stress  
    and characterization of the cold-tolerant gene LTG5 in rice. BMC Plant Biol 20:1–17 
Pang Y, Chen K, Wang X et al (2017) Simultaneous improvement and genetic dissection of salt tol- 
    erance of rice (Oryza sativa L.) by designed QTL pyramiding. Front Plant Sci 8:1275. https:// 
    doi.org/10.3389/fpls.2017.01275 

----------------------- Page 286-----------------------

Genetics and Breeding of Low-Temperature Stress Tolerance in Rice                                   275 

Park H, Soon I, Han J et al (2009) OsDEG10 encoding a small RNA-binding protein is involved  
    in   abiotic   stress   signaling.   Biochem   Biophys   Res   Commun   380:597–602.   https://doi. 
    org/10.1016/j.bbrc.2009.01.131 
Park M, Yun K, Mohanty B et al (2010) Supra-optimal expression of the cold-regulated OsMyb4  
    transcription factor in transgenic rice changes the complexity of transcriptional network with  
    major effects on stress tolerance and panicle development. Plant Cell Environ 33:2209–2230 
Park IK, Oh CS, Kim DM et al (2013) QTL mapping for cold tolerance at the seedling stage using  
    introgression lines derived from an intersubspecific cross in rice. Plant Breed Biotech 1:1–8.  
    https://doi.org/10.9787/PBB.2013.1.1.001 
Pouramir Dashtmian F, Khajeh Hosseini M, Esfahani M (2013) Methods for rice genotypes cold  
    tolerance evaluation at germination stage. Int J Agric Crop Sci 5:2111 
Ranawake AL, Nakamura C (2011) Cold tolerance of an inbred line population of rice (Oryza  
    sativa L) at different growth stages. Trop Agric Res Ext 14:25–33 
Ranawake A, Nakamura C (2015) QTL analysis of dehydration tolerance at seedling stage in rice  
    (Oryza sativa L.). Trop Agric Res 15:98 
Ranawake AL, Manangkil OE, Yoshida S et al (2014) Mapping QTLs for cold tolerance at ger- 
    mination and the early seedling stage in rice (Oryza sativa L.). Biotechnol Biotechnol Equip  
    28:989–998. https://doi.org/10.1080/13102818.2014.978539 
Saad RB, Fabre D, Mieulet D et al (2012) Expression of the Aeluropus littoralis AlSAP gene in  
    rice confers broad tolerance to abiotic stresses through maintenance of photosynthesis. Plant  
    Cell Environ 35:626–643 
Saito K, Miura K, Nagano K et al (1995) Chromosomal location of quantitative trait loci for cool  
    tolerance at the booting stage in rice [Oryza sativa] variety ‘Norin-PL8’. Breed Sci 45:337–340 
Saito K, Miura K, Nagano K et al (2001) Identification of two closely linked quantitative trait loci  
    for cold tolerance on chromosome 4 of rice and their association with anther length. Theor  
    Appl Genet 103:862–868 
Saito  K,  Hayano-Saito Y,  Maruyama-Funatsuki W  et  al  (2004)  Physical  mapping  and  putative  
    candidate gene identification of a quantitative trait locus  Ctb1 for cold tolerance at the boot- 
    ing stage of rice. Theor Appl Genet 109:515–522. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00122- 004- 1667- z 
Sakamoto A, Murata N (2002) The role of glycine betaine in the protection of plants from stress:  
    clues from transgenic plants. Plant Cell Environ 25:163–171 
Sales  E, Viruel  J,  Domingo  C,  Marqués  L  (2017)  Genome  wide  association  analysis  of  cold  
    tolerance  at  germination  in  temperate  japonica  rice  (Oryza  sativa  L.)  varieties.  PLoS  One  
    12:e0183416 
Sanchez-Ballesta MT, Lafuente MT, Zacarias L, Granell A (2000) Involvement of phenylalanine  
    ammonia-lyase in the response of Fortune mandarin fruits to cold temperature. Physiol Plant  
    108:382–389 
Satake T (1976) Sterile-type cool injury in paddy rice plants. In: Proceedings of the Symposium  
    on Climate and Rice. International Rice Research Institute (IRRI), Los Baños, pp 281–300 
Sato Y, Masuta Y, Saito K et al (2011) Enhanced chilling tolerance at the booting stage in rice  
    by  transgenic  overexpression  of  the  ascorbate  peroxidase  gene,  OsAPXa.  Plant  Cell  Rep  
    30:399–406 
Satoh T, Tezuka K, Kawamoto T et al (2016) Identification of QTLs controlling low- temperature  
    germination  of  the  East  European  rice  (Oryza  sativa  L.)  variety  Maratteli.  Euphytica  
    207:245–254. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10681- 015- 1531- z 
Schiller JM, Linquist B, Douangsila K et al (2001) Constraints to rice production systems in Laos.  
    In: ACIAR Proceedings 1998. ACIAR, Canberra, ACT, pp 3–19 
Schläppi MR, Jackson AK, Eizenga GC et al (2017) Assessment of five chilling tolerance traits and  
    GWAS mapping in rice using the USDA Mini-Core collection. Front Plant Sci 8:957. https:// 
    doi.org/10.3389/fpls.2017.00957 
Seck PA, Diagne A, Mohanty S, Wopereis MCS (2012) Crops that feed the world 7: rice. Food  
    Secur 4:7–24 

----------------------- Page 287-----------------------

276                                                                                       S. Najeeb et al. 

Serrano-Mislata A, Bencivenga S, Bush M et al (2017) DELLA genes restrict inflorescence meri- 
    stem function independently of plant height. Nat Plants 3:749 
Shakiba E, Edwards JD, Jodari F et al (2017) Genetic architecture of cold tolerance in rice (Oryza  
    sativa) determined through high resolution genome-wide analysis. PLoS One 12:1–22. https:// 
    doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0172133 
Sharma KD, Nayyar H (2016) Regulatory networks in pollen development under cold stress. Front  
    Plant Sci 7:402 
Shi J, Cao Y, Fan X (2012) A rice microsomal delta-12 fatty acid desaturase can enhance resis- 
    tance to cold stress in yeast and Oryza sativa. Mol Breed 29:743–757. https://doi.org/10.1007/ 
    s11032- 011- 9587- 5 
Shim K-C, Kim S, Le AQ et al (2019) Fine mapping of a low-temperature germinability QTL  
    qLTG1  using  introgression  lines  derived  from  Oryza  rufipogon.  Plant  Breed  Biotechnol  
    7:141–150 
Shinada H, Iwata N, Sato T, Fujino K (2013) Genetical and morphological characterization of  
    cold  tolerance  at  fertilization  stage  in  rice.  Breed  Sci  63:197–204.  https://doi.org/10.1270/ 
    jsbbs.63.197 
Shinozaki K, Yamaguchi-Shinozaki K (2000) Molecular responses to dehydration and low tem- 
    perature: differences and cross-talk between two stress signaling pathways. Curr Opin Plant  
    Biol 3:217–223 
Shirasawa  K,  Shiokai  S, Yamaguchi  M  et  al  (2006)  Dot-blot-SNP  analysis  for  practical  plant  
    breeding and cultivar identification in rice. Theor Appl Genet 113:147–155 
Shirasawa S, Endo T, Nakagomi K et al (2012) Delimitation of a QTL region controlling cold  
    tolerance at booting stage of a cultivar,‘Lijiangxintuanheigu’, in rice,  Oryza sativa L. Theor  
    Appl Genet 124:937–946 
Singh BK, Sutradhar M, Singh AK, Mandal N (2017) Cold stress in rice at early growth stage: an  
    overview. Int J Pure Appl Biosci 5:407–419 
Sinha SK, Amitha Mithra SV, Chaudhary S et al (2018) Transcriptome analysis of two rice varieties  
    contrasting for nitrogen use efficiency under chronic N starvation reveals differences in chlo- 
    roplast and starch metabolism-related genes. Genes (Basel) 9:1–22.  https://doi.org/10.3390/ 
    genes9040206 
Sivapalan S (2013) Cold tolerance of temperate and tropical rice varieties. Frank Wise Institute of  
    Tropical Agriculture, Kununurra, WA. 4 p 
Snell P, Johnston D, Ford R (2008) Cold tolerant rice varieties: a matter of need for Australia.  
    IREC Farm Newsl 177:4–5 
Song S-Y, Chen Y, Chen J et al (2011) Physiological mechanisms underlying OsNAC5-dependent  
    tolerance of rice plants to abiotic stress. Planta 234:331–345 
Song J, Li J, Sun J et al (2018) Genome-wide association mapping for cold tolerance in a core  
    collection of rice (Oryza sativa L.) landraces by using high-density single nucleotide poly- 
    morphism markers from specific-locus amplified fragment sequencing. Front Plant Sci 9:875 
Sthapit BR, Witcombe JR (1998) Inheritance of tolerance to chilling stress in rice during germina- 
    tion and plumule greening. Crop Sci 38:660–665 
Su CF, Wang YC, Hsieh TH et al (2010) A novel MYBS3-dependent pathway confers cold toler- 
    ance in rice. Plant Physiol 153:145–158. https://doi.org/10.1104/pp.110.153015 
Suh JP, Jeung JU, Lee JI et al (2010) Identification and analysis of QTLs controlling cold tolerance  
    at the reproductive stage and validation of effective QTLs in cold-tolerant genotypes of rice  
    (Oryza sativa L.). Theor Appl Genet 120:985–995 
Suh JP, Lee CK, Lee JH et al (2012) Identification of quantitative trait loci for seedling cold toler- 
    ance using RILs derived from a cross between japonica and tropical japonica rice cultivars.  
    Euphytica 184:101–108 
Sun Z, Du J, Pu X et al (2019) Near-isogenic lines of japonica rice revealed new QTLs for cold  
    tolerance at booting stage. Agronomy 9(1):40. https://doi.org/10.3390/agronomy9010040 
Sweeney  M,  McCouch  S  (2007)  The  complex  history  of  the  domestication  of  rice. Ann  Bot  
    100:951–957 

----------------------- Page 288-----------------------

Genetics and Breeding of Low-Temperature Stress Tolerance in Rice                                      277 

Takahashi N (1984) Differentiation of ecotypes in Oryza sativa L. In: Developments in crop sci- 
    ence. Elsevier, Amsterdam, pp 31–67 
Takesawa T, Ito M, Kanzaki H et al (2002) Over-expression of ζ glutathione S-transferase in trans- 
    genic rice enhances germination and growth at low temperature. Mol Breed 9:93–101 
Tao Z, Kou Y, Liu H et al (2011) OsWRKY45 alleles play different roles in abscisic acid signal- 
    ling and salt stress tolerance but similar roles in drought and cold tolerance in rice. J Exp Bot  
    62:4863–4874. https://doi.org/10.1093/jxb/err144 
Teng S, Zeng D, Qian Q et al (2001) QTL analysis of rice low temperature germinability. Chin Sci  
    Bull 46:1800–1803 
Urano  K,  Maruyama  K,  Ogata Y  et  al  (2009)  Characterization  of  the  ABA-regulated  global  
    responses to dehydration in Arabidopsis by metabolomics. Plant J 57:1065–1078 
Vats S, Kumawat S, Kumar V et al (2019) Genome editing in plants: exploration of technological  
    advancements and challenges. Cell 8:1386 
Wainaina CM, Makihara D, Nakamura M et al (2018) Identification and validation of QTLs for  
    cold tolerance at the booting stage and other agronomic traits in a rice cross of a Japanese  
    tolerant variety, Hananomai, and a NERICA parent, WAB56-104. Plant Prod Sci 21:132–143 
Wang Q, Guan Y, Wu Y et al (2008) Overexpression of a rice  OsDREB1F gene increases salt,  
    drought, and low temperature tolerance in both Arabidopsis and rice. Plant Mol Biol 67:589–602 
Wang ZF, Wang JF, Wang FH et al (2009) Genetic control of germination ability under cold stress  
    in rice. Rice Sci 16:173–180. https://doi.org/10.1016/S1672- 6308(08)60076- 1 
Wang Z, Wang F, Zhou R et al (2011) Identification of quantitative trait loci for cold tolerance dur- 
    ing the germination and seedling stages in rice (Oryza sativa L.). Euphytica 181:405 
Wang C, Wei Q, Zhang K et al (2013a) Down-regulation of  OsSPX1 causes high sensitivity to  
    cold and oxidative stresses in rice seedlings. PLoS One 8(12):e81849. https://doi.org/10.1371/ 
    journal.pone.0081849 
Wang  J,  Lin  X,  Sun  Q,  Jena  KK  (2013b)  Evaluation  of  cold  tolerance  for  japonica  rice  vari- 
    eties  from  different  countries.  Adv  J  Food  Sci  Technol  5:54–56.  https://doi.org/10.19026/ 
    ajfst.5.3311 
Wang X, Han F, Yang M et al (2013c) Exploring the response of rice (Oryza sativa) leaf to gib- 
    berellins: a proteomic strategy. Rice 6:17 
Wang D, Liu J, Li C et al (2016) Genome-wide association mapping of cold tolerance genes at the  
    seedling stage in rice. Rice 9:61. https://doi.org/10.1186/s12284- 016- 0133- 2 
Wei J, Wang A, Li R et al (2018) Metabolome-wide association studies for agronomic traits of rice.  
    Heredity (Edinb) 120:342 
Williams ME, Torabinejad J, Cohick E et al (2005) Mutations in the Arabidopsis phosphoinositide  
    phosphatase gene SAC9 lead to overaccumulation of PtdIns(4,5)P2 and constitutive expression  
    of the stress-response pathway. Plant Physiol 138:686–700 
Wittmann-Liebold B, Graack H, Pohl T (2006) Two-dimensional gel electrophoresis as tool for  
    proteomics studies in combination with protein identification by mass spectrometry. Proteomics  
    6:4688–4703 
Wolter F, Schindele P, Puchta H (2019) Plant breeding at the speed of light: the power of CRISPR/ 
    Cas to generate directed genetic diversity at multiple sites. BMC Plant Biol 19:176 
Xiang Y,  Huang Y,  Xiong  L  (2007)  Characterization  of  stress-responsive  CIPK  genes  in  rice  
    for  stress  tolerance  improvement.  Plant  Physiol  144:1416–1428.  https://doi.org/10.1104/ 
    pp.107.101295 
Xiao N, Huang W, Li A et al (2015) Fine mapping of the qLOP2 and qPSR2-1 loci associated with  
    chilling stress tolerance of wild rice seedlings. Theor Appl Genet 128:173–185 
Xiao N, Gao Y, Qian H et al (2018) Identification of genes related to cold tolerance and a functional  
    allele that confers cold tolerance. Plant Physiol 177:1108–1123 
Xiong L, Yang Y (2003) Disease resistance and abiotic stress tolerance in rice are inversely modu- 
    lated by an abscisic acid–inducible mitogen-activated protein kinase. Plant Cell 15:745–759 
Xu L-M, Zhou L, Zeng Y-W et al (2008) Identification and mapping of quantitative trait loci for  
    cold tolerance at the booting stage in a japonica rice near-isogenic line. Plant Sci 174:340–347 

----------------------- Page 289-----------------------

278                                                                                         S. Najeeb et al. 

Xu R, Yang Y, Qin R et al (2016) Rapid improvement of grain weight via highly efficient CRISPR/ 
    Cas9-mediated multiplex genome editing in rice. J Genet Genom 43:529–532 
Xu Y, Hu D, Hou X et al (2020) OsTMF attenuates cold tolerance by affecting cell wall properties  
    in rice. New Phytol 227:498. https://doi.org/10.1111/nph.16549 
Yamaguchi-Shinozaki K, Shinozaki K (2004) Improving abiotic stress tolerance in crops. In The  
    8th International Symposium on the Biosafety of Genetically Modified Organisms, Montpellier,  
    France, 26–30 September, 2004, International Society for Biosafety Research, pp 134–136 
Yamori W, Noguchi KO, Hikosaka K, Terashima I (2010) Phenotypic plasticity in photosynthetic  
    temperature  acclimation  among  crop  species  with  different  cold  tolerances.  Plant  Physiol  
    152:388–399 
Yamori W, Sakata N, Suzuki Y et al (2011) Cyclic electron flow around photosystem I via chlo- 
    roplast  NAD(P)H  dehydrogenase  (NDH)  complex  performs  a  significant  physiological  role  
    during photosynthesis and plant growth at low temperature in rice. Plant J 68:966–976. https:// 
    doi.org/10.1111/j.1365- 313X.2011.04747.x 
Yan SP, Zhang QY, Tang ZC et al (2006) Comparative proteomic analysis provides new insights  
    into chilling stress responses in rice. Mol Cell Proteomics 5:484–496 
Yang  T,  Poovaiah  BW  (2003)  Calcium/calmodulin-mediated  signal  network  in  plants.  Trends  
    Plant Sci 8:505–512 
Yang G, Rhodes D, Joly RJ (1996) Effects of high temperature on membrane stability and chlo- 
    rophyll  fluorescence  in  glycinebetaine-deficient  and  glycinebetaine-containing  maize  lines.  
    Funct Plant Biol 23:437–443 
Yang  T,  Shad  Ali  G, Yang  L  et  al  (2010)  Calcium/calmodulin-regulated  receptor-like  kinase  
    CRLK1 interacts with MEKK1 in plants. Plant Signal Behav 5:991–994 
Yang A, Dai X, Zhang W-H (2012) A R2R3-type MYB gene, OsMYB2, is involved in salt, cold,  
    and dehydration tolerance in rice. J Exp Bot 63:2541–2556 
Yang C, Li D, Mao D et al (2013a) Overexpression of microRNA319 impacts leaf morphogenesis  
    and leads to enhanced cold tolerance in rice (Oryza sativa L.). Plant Cell Environ 36:2207–2218 
Yang Z, Huang D, Tang W et al (2013b) Mapping of quantitative trait loci underlying cold toler- 
    ance in rice seedlings via high-throughput sequencing of pooled extremes. PLoS One 8:e68433 
Yang W, Guo Z, Huang C et al (2014) Combining high-throughput phenotyping and genome-wide  
    association studies to reveal natural genetic variation in rice. Nat Commun 5:5087 
Yang  LM,  Liu  HL,  Lei  L  et  al  (2018)  Identification  of  QTLs  controlling  low-temperature  
     germinability  and  cold  tolerance  at  the  seedling  stage  in  rice  (Oryza  sativa  L.).  Euphytica  
    214:13. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10681- 017- 2092- 0 
Ye C, Fukai S, Godwin I et al (2009) Cold tolerance in rice varieties at different growth stages.  
    Crop Pasture Sci 60:328–338 
Yokotani N, Sato Y, Tanabe S et al (2013) WRKY76 is a rice transcriptional repressor playing  
    opposite roles in blast disease resistance and cold stress tolerance. J Exp Bot 64:5085–5097.  
    https://doi.org/10.1093/jxb/ert298 
Yoshida  S  (1981)  Fundamentals  of  rice  crop  science.  International  Rice  Research  Institute,  
    Los Baños 
Yu S, Li M, Xiao Y et al (2018) Mapping QTLs for cold tolerance at seedling stage using an Oryza  
    sativa × O. rufipogon backcross inbred line population. Czech J Genet Plant Breed 54:59–64.  
    https://doi.org/10.17221/154/2016- CJGPB 
Yuan P, Yang T, Poovaiah BW (2018) Calcium signaling-mediated plant response to cold stress.  
    Int J Mol Sci 19:3896 
Yun KY, Park MR, Mohanty B et al (2010) Transcriptional regulatory network triggered by oxida- 
    tive signals configures the early response mechanisms of japonica rice to chilling stress. BMC  
    Plant Biol 10:16 
Zhang X, Fowler SG, Cheng H et al (2004) Freezing-sensitive tomato has a functional CBF cold  
    response pathway, but a CBF regulon that differs from that of freezing-tolerant Arabidopsis .  
    Plant J 39:905–919 
Zhang Y, Chen C, Jin XF et al (2009) Expression of a rice DREB1 gene,  OsDREB1D, enhances  
    cold and high-salt tolerance in transgenic Arabidopsis . BMB Rep 42:486–492 

----------------------- Page 290-----------------------

Genetics and Breeding of Low-Temperature Stress Tolerance in Rice                                      279 

Zhang J, Li J, Wang X, Chen J (2011) OVP1, a vacuolar H+-translocating inorganic pyrophospha- 
    tase (V-PPase), overexpression improved rice cold tolerance. Plant Physiol Biochem 49:33–38 
Zhang T, Zhao X, Wang W et al (2012a) Comparative transcriptome profiling of chilling stress  
    responsiveness in two contrasting rice genotypes. PLoS One 7:e43274 
Zhang Y, Xu Y, Yi H, Gong J (2012b) Vacuolar membrane transporters OsVIT1 and OsVIT2  
    modulate iron translocation between flag leaves and seeds in rice. Plant J 72:400–410 
Zhang K, Liu H, Tao P, Chen H (2014a) Comparative proteomic analyses provide new insights into  
    low phosphorus stress responses in maize leaves. PLoS One 9:e98215. https://doi.org/10.1371/ 
    journal.pone.0098215 
Zhang  Q,  Chen  Q, Wang  S  et  al  (2014b)  Rice  and  cold  stress:  methods  for  its  evaluation  and  
    summary of cold tolerance-related quantitative trait loci. Rice 7:24. https://doi.org/10.1186/ 
    s12284- 014- 0024- 3 
Zhang S, Zheng J, Liu B et al (2014c) Identification of QTLs for cold tolerance at seedling stage  
    in rice (Oryza sativa L.) using two distinct methods of cold treatment. Euphytica 195:95–104 
Zhang J, Luo W, Zhao Y et al (2016) Comparative metabolomic analysis reveals a reactive oxygen  
    species-dominated dynamic model underlying chilling environment adaptation and tolerance  
    in rice. New Phytol 211:1295–1310 
Zhang Z, Li JJJ, Pan Y et al (2017) Natural variation in  CTB4a enhances rice adaptation to cold  
    habitats. Nat Commun 8:1–13. https://doi.org/10.1007/BF01337500 
Zhang M, Ye J, Xu Q et al (2018) Genome-wide association study of cold tolerance of Chinese  
    indica rice varieties at the bud burst stage. Plant Cell Rep 37:529–539 
Zhao WG, Chung JW, Kwon SW et al (2013) Association analysis of physicochemical traits on  
    eating quality in rice (Oryza sativa L.). Euphytica 191:9–21 
Zhi-Hong Z, Li S, Wei L et al (2005) A major QTL conferring cold tolerance at the early seedling  
    stage using recombinant inbred lines of rice (Oryza sativa L.). Plant Sci 168:527–534. https:// 
    doi.org/10.1016/j.plantsci.2004.09.021 
Zhou L, Zeng Y, Hu G et al (2012) Characterization and identification of cold tolerant near- isogenic  
    lines in rice. Breed Sci 62:196–201 
Zhu JK (2016) Abiotic stress signaling and responses in plants. Cell 167:313–324 
Zhu Y, Chen K, Mi X et al (2015) Identification and fine mapping of a stably expressed QTL for  
    cold tolerance at the booting stage using an interconnected breeding population in rice. PLoS  
    One 10:e0145704. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0145704 

----------------------- Page 291-----------------------

280                                                                                  S. Najeeb et al. 

Open Access    This chapter is licensed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution 4.0  
International License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/), which permits use, sharing,  
adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give appropriate  
credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons license and  
indicate if changes were made. 
    The images or other third party material in this chapter are included in the chapter's Creative  
Commons license, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not  
included in the chapter's Creative Commons license and your intended use is not permitted by  
statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from  
the copyright holder. 

----------------------- Page 292-----------------------

Arsenic Stress Responses  
and Accumulation in Rice 

Varunseelan Murugaiyan, Frederike Zeibig, Mahender Anumalla,  
Sameer Ali Siddiq, Michael Frei, Jayaseelan Murugaiyan, and Jauhar Ali 

Abstract  Rice (Oryza sativa L.) is one of the world’s most vital staple grains, and  
90% of it is produced and consumed in Asia alone. It plays a significant role in the  
entry of mineral nutrients into the food chain. Arsenic (As) is a toxic heavy metal  
that  threatens  the  major  rice-growing  regions  in  the  world,  particularly  in Asia.  
Arsenic  is  ubiquitously  present  in  moderate  concentrations  in  the  environment  
because of natural geological processes and anthropogenic impacts. However, rapid  
industrialization and excessive use of arsenic-rich groundwater are further fueling  
the increased arsenic concentration in agricultural topsoil. Arsenic accumulation in  
rice plants has a significant adverse effect on plant, human, and livestock health.  
Although  arsenic  contamination  in  rice  is  well  documented,  its  interaction  and  
accumulation in rice are poorly understood. So far, no candidate genes or QTLs  
associated with arsenic interaction are used in breeding programs for the development  
of low-arsenic-accumulating rice varieties. The development and adaptation of new  
low-arsenic-accumulating rice cultivars resilient to arsenic toxicity constitute safe  

V. Murugaiyan · F. Zeibig  
Rice Breeding Platform, International Rice Research Institute (IRRI), Los Baños, Philippines  

Institute of Crop Sciences and Resource Conservation (INRES), University of Bonn,   
Bonn, Germany  

M. Anumalla  
Rice Breeding Platform, International Rice Research Institute (IRRI), Los Baños, Philippines  

S. A. Siddiq  
University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN, USA  

M. Frei  
Institute of Crop Sciences and Resource Conservation (INRES), University of Bonn,   
Bonn, Germany  

Department of Agronomy and Plant Breeding, Justus Liebig University, Giessen, Germany  

J. Murugaiyan  
Department of Biotechnology, SRM University-AP, Amaravati, Andhra Pradesh, India  

J. Ali (*)  
Hybrid Rice Breeding Cluster, Hybrid Rice Development Consortium (HRDC), Rice  
Breeding Platform, International Rice Research Institute (IRRI),   
Los Baños, Laguna, Philippines 
e-mail: J.Ali@irri.org 

© The Author(s) 2021                                                                             281 
J. Ali, S. H. Wani (eds.), Rice Improvement,  
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-66530-2_9 

----------------------- Page 293-----------------------

282                                                                       V. Murugaiyan et al. 

ways to mitigate arsenic contamination in rice. Recent scientific advances in rice  
genetics, genomics, and physiology have opened up new opportunities to speed up  
the process of developing low-arsenic-accumulating rice cultivars for the rapidly  
growing human population. 

Keywords  Heavy metal · Arsenic contamination · Arsenic speciation ·  
Phytotoxicity · Quantitative trait loci · Genes 

1     Introduction 

Rice (Oryza sativa L.) belongs to the grass family (Poaceae). Its domestication is  
one of the most significant events in the history of human agricultural advancement  
(Khush 1997; Molina et al. 2011; Huang et al. 2012a). It is one of the world’s vital  
staple grains and plays a crucial role in the entry of mineral nutrients into the food  
chain (Ali et al. 2018a). The presence of naturally occurring unwanted arsenic (As)  
metalloid  in  flooded  paddy  soil  poses  a  significant  threat  to  rice  production  and  
consumers  who  depend  on  rice  as  their  primary  staple  food  (Murugaiyan  et  al.  
2019). A total of 23–25% of the total calories consumed by humans come through  
the consumption of rice alone (Ashikari and Ma 2015; Yu et al. 2020). As the world  
population  is  likely  to  increase  further  in  the  coming  decades,  keeping  rice  
production sustainable remains a crucial challenge (Ali et al. 2018a). Currently, rice  
is planted on 166 million hectares worldwide, nurturing some four billion people  
around the world, and the annual harvest of rice is worth ~USD 200 billion (GRiSP  
2013). Rice is the primary cereal crop in Asia, where 90% of the world’s rice is  
produced  and  consumed  (Frei  and  Becker  2005;  Molden  2013). Approximately  
480 million metric tons of milled rice are produced annually; China and India alone  
account for ∼50% of the rice produced and 90% of this rice production is consumed  
domestically (Muthayya et al. 2014). Maintaining a favorable rice supply-demand  
balance in the future depends mostly on the exploitation of the production capacity  
of the rainfed ecosystem (Li and Ali 2017). On about 60% of the agricultural land  
in Asia, rice is grown under rainfed conditions (Rao et al. 2015; Ali et al. 2018a).  
The rainfed ecosystem is the dominant one in the low-income countries of Asia,  
where demand for rice is projected to remain very high throughout this century (Li  
and Ali 2017). Rice production in rainfed conditions is susceptible to a combination  
of  various  biotic  and  abiotic  stresses.  Abiotic  stresses  are  the  primary  factor  
undesirably affecting crop growth and yield worldwide (Gao et al. 2007). Various  
abiotic  stresses  limit  rice  production  in  rainfed  environments,  which  comprise  
35–45% of the global rice area (Wu et al. 2014; Li and Ali 2017). Critical abiotic  
stresses   including   extreme   temperature,   drought,   submergence,   salinity,   iron  
toxicity, nutritional deficiencies, and heavy metal contamination are known to cause  
severe losses in rice yield and in the quality of the seed produced (Messerschmidt  
et al. 2002; Li and Ali 2017; Wu et al. 2017). 

----------------------- Page 294-----------------------

Arsenic Stress Responses and Accumulation in Rice                                          283 

   Large tracts of paddy soil are directly affected by heavy metal (arsenic, lead, and  
cadmium) contamination, especially in India, China, and Bangladesh (Das et al.  
2008; Chakraborti et al. 2013; Wu et al. 2016). Rice is conventionally produced in  
flooded  paddy  fields,  which  can  translocate  the  unwanted  class  I  carcinogenic-  
arsenic metalloid into the straw and grain (Sayan et al. 2012). An accumulation of  
arsenic in the rice plant negatively affects plant performance and also threatens the  
health of consumers and livestock (Carbonell-Barrachina et al.  2015). Himalayan  
rivers carry arsenic from rock sediments to the densely populated rice-producing  
regions of South and Southeast Asia, threatening the primary rice-growing belt of  
Asia. In these areas, rice production is already threatened by climate change with  
the frequent intrusion of saltwater in the Ganges-Brahmaputra deltaic regions, and  
extended  periods  of  drought  also  force  farmers  to  depend  on  groundwater  for  
irrigating  paddy  fields  (Murugaiyan  et  al.  2019).  This  groundwater  is  naturally  
enriched  because  of  arsenic-rich  aquifers  and  it  acts  as  an  additional  source  of  
arsenic in paddy fields. The long-term use of arsenic-rich groundwater for irrigating  
rice crops has resulted in an increased concentration of arsenic in paddy topsoil,  
with up to 83 mg As/kg being reported in some parts of Bangladesh and the Indian  
subcontinent (Suriyagoda et al. 2018). Without intervention, this concentration will  
tend to increase in the coming decades because of the significant dependence on  
groundwater  for  rice  production.  However,  rice  varieties  suitable  for  growing  in  
arsenic-rich fields have not been developed. Despite this arsenic threat, the major  
rice-growing countries in Asia need more food for their rapidly growing populations,  
leaving  scientists  with  the  challenge  of  developing  rice  varieties  that  do  not  
accumulate arsenic in the grain and straw. These varieties also need to withstand  
other abiotic stresses such as drought, salinity, and flooding. Because of global food  
security and the increasing health-related concerns associated with arsenic exposure  
through rice, it has become vital to understand arsenic toxicity, the interaction with  
rice plants, and the physiological mechanisms associated with arsenic accumulation  
in  rice.  Recent  scientific  advances,  particularly  in  genetics,  genomics,  and  crop  
physiology, have opened up new opportunities to speed up the process of developing  
highly adaptable rice cultivars that are safe and nutritious for meeting the future  
food demand of the growing population. 

2     Heavy Metal Contamination 

Heavy metal contamination has become a significant limitation to sustainable crop  
production. Particularly in rice, it poses a severe threat to human nutrition and food  
security (Murugaiyan 2019). The presence of toxic heavy metals such as arsenic  
(As),  cadmium  (Cd),  lead  (Pb),  and  mercury  (Hg)  in  irrigated  water  systems  
threatens not only the rice plant but also the populations that depend on rice for their  
dietary supply. Additionally, feeding rice straw from contaminated paddy fields to  
cattle  leads  to  an  additional  entry  of  these  elements  into  the  human  food  chain.  
Toxic   heavy   metals   ubiquitously   persist   at   moderate   concentrations   in   the  

----------------------- Page 295-----------------------

284                                                                                                       V. Murugaiyan et al. 

environment because of natural weathering of rocks and minerals, and also through  
anthropogenic impacts, and they tend to translocate in the food chain (Wu et al.  
2016).  In  recent  years,  heavy  metal  contamination  has  increased  significantly  in  
agricultural soil because of the frequent use of polluted irrigation water (Clemens  
and Ma 2016). Various studies have reported that chronic exposure to heavy metals  
is often associated with cancer and potentially causes neurotoxicity (Vahidnia et al.  
2007). Heavy metals cause developmental neurotoxicity, which is concerning since  
these developmental abnormalities are often irreversible (Mochizuki 2019). 

2.1        Heavy Metal Interaction with the Biological System  

In a biological system, the toxic effects of these metals may be similar even though  
their sources are distinct (Fig.  1). Lead and cadmium share similar ionic size and  
charge,  which  make  them  behave  similarly  in  the  biological  system,  especially  
regarding their toxicity for the same or related molecular targets (Pohl et al. 2011).  
In principle, lead and cadmium mimic essential ions such as calcium (Ca2+) and zinc  
(Zn2+) and use their channels to get into the system (Jomova and Valko 2011). Lead  

and cadmium exposure generally occurs as a result of industrial exposure. At the  
same time, arsenic has been reported to occur naturally or as a contaminant, mainly  
with  irrigation  water,  and  is  often  of  geographic  origin  (Abernathy  et  al.  2001).  

                                          Toxic heavy metals in agricultural topsoil 

                               Arsenic                                     Lead                                 Cadmium 

    Common                                Thiol-binding  metals                    Similar ionic size and charge 

     feature 

     Action                          Binds to protein-containing                 Mimics Ca2+ and Zn2+ channels and 
                                          SH-rich amino acids                         replaces Ca2+  in enzymes 

                        Antioxidant stress in       Neurocognitive functional changes              Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis  
   Neurotoxic  
      effect             developing brain           and encephalopathy                             and neurobehavioral effects 

         Lead, cadmium, and arsenic contamination have been reported in drinking and irrigation  
                                                  water and in dietary sources  

      Heavy metal contamination through drinking water and dietary sources leads to additive or  
                                   synergistic toxic responses in brain development  

Fig. 1   Similarities between heavy metals and their interaction with the biological system 

----------------------- Page 296-----------------------

Arsenic Stress Responses and Accumulation in Rice                                          285 

Arsenic and lead are known as thiol-binding metals. Hence, both are expected to  
behave  similarly  and  show  similar  targets  and  binding  sites  (Flora  et  al.  2011).  
Arsenic and lead could bind to protein-containing sulfhydryl-rich amino acids such  
as cysteine residue and could have the same toxic effect. When heavy metals are  
ingested  by  humans,  the  nervous  system  is  a  primary  target  for  several  of  them  
(Sengupta and Bishayi 2002; Nordberg et al. 2005; Thomas 2013). 

2.2      Chronic Arsenic Exposure and Its Adverse Effects  
        on Human Health 

Arsenic is a metalloid element. It is the 20th most abundant mineral in Earth’s  
crust with an average concentration in sediments ranging from 5 to 10 mg/kg  
(National  Research  Council  (U.S.)  Committee  on  Medical  and  Biological  
Effects  of  Environmental  Pollutants  1977).  Chronic  exposure  to  arsenic  is  
linked with myriad possible adverse health effects on humans, including skin  
lesions, hypertension, cardiovascular disease, pulmonary disease, reproductive  
and  neurological  dysfunctions,  hematological  changes,  and  malignancies  of  
skin and internal organs (Mandal and Suzuki 2002). Groundwater arsenic con- 
tamination and its ill health effects in Southeast Asian countries came into the  
limelight in 1984 when groundwater used for drinking purposes was directly  
tainted by arsenic from natural sources (Garai et al.  1984; Duker et al. 2005).  
A  substantial  part  of  the  Ganga- Meghna- Brahmaputra  plain,  with  an  area  of  
              2 
569,749 km  and population surpassing 500 million, was at risk of mass arsenic  
poisoning  (Das  et  al.  2008;  Chakraborti  et  al.  2013).  The  World  Health  
Organization  (WHO)  has  recommended  <10μg/L  concentration  of  arsenic  in  
drinking water as a safe limit (Muhammad et al. 2010; Kumar and Puri 2012).  
However, high levels of arsenic contamination through groundwater and their  
adverse impact on human health have been reported in many countries across  
the world (Nriagu et al. 2007). The magnitude of this problem is of great con- 
cern in Bangladesh, followed by India and China (Nickson et al. 2000; Mohan  
and Pittman  2007; Guha Mazumder 2015; Tareq et al. 2015). Approximately  
85–150  million  people  in  India  and  Bangladesh  are  at  immediate  risk  from  
mass arsenic poisoning through contaminated drinking water (Hossain 2006).  
Both long- and short-term exposure are hazardous and can lead to skin, blad- 
der, lung, and prostate cancers, cardiovascular diseases, diabetes, and anemia,  
as  well  as  reproductive,  developmental,  immunological,  and  neurological  
effects (Roy and Saha 2002; Ng 2005; Guha Mazumder 2008). Arsenicosis is a  
chronic illness linked with drinking water with high concentrations of arsenic  
over a long period and it commonly occurs in populations exposed to arsenic  
contamination in their living environment (Mazumder  2003; Sun 2004; Kalia  
and Flora 2005). 

----------------------- Page 297-----------------------

286                                                                     V. Murugaiyan et al. 

3     Arsenic Contamination in Paddy Soil 

Arsenic-containing compounds were used widely in the early twentieth century as  
pesticides and fungicides, which led to a high-arsenic load in agricultural topsoil  
and water runoff (Mukherjee et al.  2017). Most arsenic exposures occur through  
contaminated  drinking  and  irrigation  water  sources. Arsenic  is  mainly  found  in  
pesticides  (lead  arsenate,  calcium  arsenate,  and  sodium  arsenite),  herbicides  
(monosodium  arsenate  and  cacodylic  acid  and  dimethyl  arsenic  acid),  cotton  
desiccants (arsenic acid), wood preservatives (zinc arsenate and chromium arsenate),  
and  semiconductors  (gallium  arsenide,  indium  arsenide,  and  aluminum  gallium  
arsenide). Arsenic is even used as a desiccant and defoliant in agriculture, and as a  
by-product  in  the  smelting  process,  particularly  for  gold  and  copper,  from  coal  
residues (Järup 2003; Vaughan 2006; Chen et al. 2016). Rivers originating from the  
higher Himalayas carry arsenic from their rock deposits to the densely inhabited  
rice-growing regions of South and Southeast Asia, making the primary rice-growing  
belt of Asia vulnerable to arsenic pollution (Shepherd et al.  2015; Lawson et al.  
2016). Climate change is also threatening rice production in these areas. With the  
frequent occurrence of drought and saltwater intrusion in the Ganges-Brahmaputra  
deltas of India and Bangladesh, farmers increasingly tap groundwater resources for  
irrigation  (Laha  2017).  This  groundwater  is  an  additional  source  of  arsenic  
discharged  from  the  naturally  abundant  arsenic  aquifers  (Bondu  et  al.  2016).  
Typically, 4–8 mg/kg of arsenic occur in flooded paddy soil, but the concentration  
increases exponentially in paddy soil throughout the cropping season and can reach  
83 mg As/kg in parts of Bangladesh and West Bengal regions of India (Abedin et al.  
2002b;  Zavala  and  Duxbury  2008).  Evidence  has  emerged  in  recent  years  that  
arsenic-enriched groundwater occurs commonly in other Asian countries, including  
Cambodia, Myanmar, Pakistan, Nepal, Vietnam, and Japan (Fig.  2) (Smith et al.  
2000; Das et al. 2008; Brammer and Ravenscroft 2009; Jiang et al. 2013). In the  
early 1970s, the use of surface water was abandoned mainly in the Bengal delta in  
response  to  severe  health  effects  caused  by  pathogens,  and  this  unexpectedly  
resulted in the extensive use of arsenic-contaminated groundwater (Caldwell et al.  
2003).  Alluvial  and  deltaic  environments  are  mainly  characterized  by  reducing  
conditions that cause a high-arsenic release in groundwater (Abernathy et al. 2001;  
Lee et al.  2008). Arsenic-abundant groundwater is drawn from shallow (<100 m)  
depths by domestic and irrigation wells in the Bengal basin aquifer system (Sultana  
2013). It has been reported that groundwater from shallow tube wells (12–33 m)  
contains very high amounts of arsenic. In contrast, the water from deep tube wells  
(200–300  m)  contains  lower  amounts  of  arsenic  (<50μg/L)  (Hossain  2006).  
Subsurface mobilization of arsenic is mainly caused by a combination of chemical,  
physical,  and  microbial  factors,  and  various  mechanisms  have  been  proposed  to  
elucidate  arsenic  mobilization  (Anawar  et  al.  2003; Amini  et  al.  2008). Among  
those, the most widely accepted theories are pyrite oxidation and oxy-hydroxide  
reduction (Hossain  2006). Arsenic dissolution and release in deltaic regions have  
been modeled considering the contribution of microbes, organic matter, and paleo- 
sol formation (Gorny et al. 2015). 

----------------------- Page 298-----------------------

Arsenic Stress Responses and Accumulation in Rice                                                                       287 

Fig. 2   Worldwide distribution of arsenic-contaminated regions and showing contaminated regions  
overlapping with major rice-growing belt. (Image modified from the British Geological Survey,  
Safiuddin et al. 2011) 

3.1       Arsenic Contamination in Rice  

The chemical characteristics of arsenic in paddy soil are complex, as it exists in both  
organic and inorganic forms, and it differs distinctly under flooded (anaerobic) and  
non-flooded (aerobic) conditions (Meharg and Hartley-Whitaker 2002). The toxicity of  
arsenic is associated with reduced soil conditions (flooded soils), which increase the  
bioavailability of inorganic arsenic and uptake into rice (Zhao et al. 2010b; Islam et al.  
2016). Rice is commonly grown in flooded soil under reduced conditions, in which it  
assimilates inorganic arsenic into its grain, and this accumulation may adversely affect  
the nutritional quality of the grain (Islam et al. 2016). Of the total arsenic present in rice  
grain, inorganic arsenic constitutes approximately 54%. Also, grain arsenic content  
increases with increased As concentration in paddy soil (Suriyagoda et al. 2018). Total  
rice grain As concentration can vary from 0.011 to 0.82 mg/kg on average, depending  
on location, contamination level, and rice cultivars used (Islam et al. 2016). In highly  
contaminated areas, arsenic concentration can reach 1.7 mg/kg in rice grain, which is  
ten times more than the limit allowed by the WHO in rice grain (Meharg and Rahman  
2003). Arsenic content in the rice plant decreases in the order of roots > leaves > grain,  
and in the rice grain, husk > bran polish > brown rice > raw rice > polished rice > cooked  
rice (Suriyagoda et al.  2018). A study with a continuous inorganic arsenic treatment  
showed an increased enrichment of up to 91.8 mg As/kg in the straw (Abedin et al.  
2002c). About 30% of the total arsenic taken up by humans was contributed through  
rice and rice products (Li et al. 2011). Furthermore, the straw that cattle feed on will  
also accumulate arsenic in milk and meat, which are in turn consumed by humans,  
leading to another route of arsenic exposure (Talukder et al. 2011). 

----------------------- Page 299-----------------------

288                                                                                                                                         V. Murugaiyan et al. 

3.2           Arsenic Speciation in the Rice Ecosystem  

Arsenic metalloid is ubiquitously found in various inorganic and organic forms in  
paddy soil. Inorganic arsenic compounds are considered to be highly toxic and they  
enter into paddy soil through both natural and anthropogenic activities (Sturchio et al.  
2013). The toxic effects of arsenic in rice plants depend on their species form, with  
inorganic arsenic species being more extremely toxic than the organic form. The most  
common  inorganic  species  that  occur  in  the  rice  ecosystem  are  arsenate(V)  and  
arsenite(III) (Fig. 3), while the most common organic species are monomethylarsonic  

acid (MMA) and dimethylarsinic acid (DMA) (Abedin et al.  2002c; Tripathi et al.  
2013). Among the inorganic species, trivalent arsenite(III) is considered to be more  
mobile and toxic than pentavalent arsenate(V). In both oxidation states, it can combine  

with  methyl  groups  to  form  organic  arsenic  species  (Vahter  and  Concha  2001).  
However, the existence of organic species in paddy soil is significantly lower than that  
of inorganic arsenic species. In anaerobic flooded-soil fields (submerged paddy fields),  
the reduced form arsenite(III) dominates; in aerobic soil conditions, such as upland rice  
fields, its oxidized form arsenate(V) dominates (Tripathi et al. 2013; Pandey et al. 2015). 

3.3           Inorganic Arsenic Interaction with Essential   
              Plant Nutrients 

Rice  plants  do  not  possess  naturally  evolved  arsenic  transporters  (Pandey  et  al.  
2015). Instead, arsenic competes with chemically similar essential minerals to enter  
the  plant  system  (Wenzel  and  Alloway  2013).  Arsenite(III)  is  physiochemically  

                              Arsenate(V) 

                             In aerobic soil conditions such as upland paddy  
                             fields, oxidized form arsenate(V) dominates 

                                                                                                  Arsenite(III) 

                                                                                  In anaerobic flooded soil conditions such as submerged  
                                                                                  paddy fields, reduced form arsenite(III)  dominates 

                 prone, low soil  
        fertility, and soil acidity  
        with aerobic soil during  
              crop growth          Drought-prone, alternating aerobic  
                                       to anaerobic soil of variable  
                                         frequency and duration 

                                                                    Favorable, shallow flooded   
                                                                    with anaerobic soil during                                                      Flood- 
                                                                           crop growth            Drought-/submergence-prone,                                 prone 
                                                                                                                                                                          
                                                                                               alternating aerobic to anaerobic soil  
                                                                                                of variable frequency and duration 
                                                                                                                                       Submergence-prone, medium to very  
                                                                                                                                      deep flooding, aerobic to anaerobic soil  
                                                                                                                                        with combination of soil salinity and  
                                                                                                                                      mineral toxicity or deficiency in coastal  
                                                                                                                                                        areas 

                                 Arsenate(V)                                                                           Arsenite(III) 

Fig.  3   Inorganic  arsenic  species  found  in  rice-growing  environments.  (Adapted  and  modified  
from Rice Almanac, 3rd edition, Maclean et al. 2002) 

----------------------- Page 300-----------------------

Arsenic Stress Responses and Accumulation in Rice                                          289 

similar to silica (Si), and thus it competes with the Si-uptake pathway. Silica is not  
considered an essential nutrient in many plant species. However, silica is uptaken  
actively by the rice plant due to anaerobic respiration, and the silica content in the  
rice stem and leaf ranges from 10% to 20% (Takahashi  1968; Ma and Takahashi  
1990; Dobermann and Fairhurst 2000). Alternatively, arsenate(V) is physiochemically  

similar to the essential mineral phosphorus (P) and uses P acquisition pathways to  
enter the root system, and for efflux toward the xylem and various tissues (Clemens  
2006; Zhao et al. 2009; Yang et al. 2018). Most rice genotypes possess a mechanism  
to  retain  much  of  the  toxic  arsenic  burden  in  the  roots.  However,  a  genotype-  
dependent proportion of arsenic is translocated into the shoots and other tissues,  
including  grains  of  the  rice  plant  (Carey  et  al.  2010;  Pandey  et  al. 2015).  Since  
35–55% of rice is produced in irrigated conditions (Ali et al.  2018b), arsenite(III)  

contributes to the dominant arsenic species loaded into rice plants (Zhao et al. 2010a). 

4     Arsenic-Induced Toxicity Symptoms During Different  
     Growth Stages of Rice 

Enhanced uptake of arsenic will influence plant growth negatively. Arsenic toxicity  
in rice plants triggers various symptoms that include lower seed germination rate,  
poor  seed  establishment,  lower  photosynthetic  rates,  stunted  plant  growth,  low  
biomass production, sterility-related yield loss, and a physiological disorder referred  
to as straighthead disease that was associated with arsenic toxicity (Fig. 4) (Rahman  
et  al.  2008;  Zhao  et  al. 2013).  Symptoms  are  often  confounded  with  other  soil-  
related problems associated with rice (Abedin et al. 2002b; Rahman et al. 2008; Zhu  
et al. 2008). 

4.1      Germination Stage 

Germination is one of the most delicate stages in a plant’s growth cycle. It can be  
easily affected by abiotic stresses such as drought, salinity, and heavy metals (Rajjou  
et al. 2012). In general, its starting point is defined with the imbibition of dry seed  
via water uptake and its termination by radicle or coleoptile appearance (Bewley  
1997). A unique feature of rice is the ability to germinate in anaerobic conditions in  
which  the  coleoptile  occurs  first,  followed  by  the  radicle.  During  this  process,  
various complex physiological and biochemical processes take place, for example,  
the synthesis and degradation of phytohormones, especially abscisic acid (ABA)  
and gibberellic acid (GA), reactivation of metabolism, and hydrolyzation of starch  
via enzymes for maintaining a source of energy (Seneviratne et al. 2019). He and  
Yang  (2013)  summarized  the  three  phases  of  germination  and  their  ongoing  
processes.  During  phase  one,  water  is  taken  up  rapidly  into  the  seed,  where  the  
biosynthesis  of  mRNA  starts,  followed  by  starch  degradation.  In  phase  2,  the  

----------------------- Page 301-----------------------

290                                                                                   V. Murugaiyan et al. 

         Germination                 Vegetative growth                  Reproductive growth 

   - Delayed or inhibited       - Decreased plant height, root       - Decreased tiller number 
     growth                       length, leaf number, and           - Less productive tillers  
   - Mortality                    vigor                              - Poor grain filling  
   - Low dry matter             - Lower biomass                      - Sterility-related yield loss  
   - Decreased root and         - Decreased chlorophyll              - Straighthead disease   
     shoot length                 content                            - Lower 1,000-grain weight 
   - Decreased leaf number      - Leaf wilting, necrosis, and  
     and leaf blade width         senescence 
   - Decreased chlorophyll  
     content  

     Low           High           Low               High                Low                  High  
     arsenic       arsenic                          arsenic 

Fig. 4   Arsenic-induced symptoms during the different growth stages in rice 

reactivation  of  metabolism  begins,  involving  starch  hydrolysis,  glycolysis,  and  
fermentation  for  mobilizing  reserves,  accompanied  by  amino  acid  biosynthesis,  
non-functional protein degradation, and mitochondria assembly. In the third phase,  
the conversion of carbohydrates to sugars begins, and the embryo is activated. The  
last step is coleoptile emergence, which is accompanied by the onset of aerobic  
respiration  (He  and Yang  2013).  Especially  in  phase  1  and  3,  water  is  taken  up  
rapidly (Bewley  1997). With the background of arsenic-contaminated water, this  
implies that the seed and its emerging seedling confront arsenic stress. This may  
lead to an interruption or alteration in the normal germination process (Seneviratne  
et al.  2019). Germination of seeds was delayed or inhibited when the seeds were  
grown in a nutrient solution with more than 5 ppm arsenic (Begum and Mondal  
2019). When seedlings were grown in pots filled with arsenic-contaminated soil,  
their  mortality  was  observed  at  40  mg/kg  arsenite(III)  in  aerobic  and  anaerobic  

conditions, but it was higher in the anaerobic treatment (Shah et al. 2014). Those  
different observations could be explained by different experimental setups, different  
growth media, or because two different varieties were tested in the studies: IET-4786  
and BRRIdhan28. When the seeds were able to germinate, they showed lower dry  
matter and decreased shoot and root length (Begum and Mondal  2019). A lower  
number of leaves and a lower leaf blade width were also observed as a consequence  

----------------------- Page 302-----------------------

Arsenic Stress Responses and Accumulation in Rice                                                         291 

of arsenic treatment (Shaibur et al. 2006). Also, the chlorophyll content of seedling  
leaves decreased, irrespective of whether the plants were treated with arsenate(V) or  
arsenite(III) (Shaibur et al. 2006; Choudhury et al. 2011; Begum and Mondal 2019).  
As a general observation, arsenite(III) treatment always caused more toxic symptoms  
on seedlings than arsenate(V) (Shah et al. 2014; Begum and Mondal 2019). 

4.2       Vegetative Growth 

The  same  symptoms  as  for  the  seedlings  keep  occurring  during  the  vegetative  
growth phase of the rice plant. Decreased plant height was most commonly observed  
(Abedin et al. 2002b; Shah et al. 2014; Dixit et al. 2016) as well as decreased root  
length and vigor (Abedin et al. 2002a; Das et al. 2013). Symptoms resulted from a  
change in IAA biosynthesis and transport, which is responsible for the formation of  
auxin.  Lower  auxin  content  then  influenced  root  development,  especially  of  the  
lateral  roots  (Ronzan  et  al.  2018). The  resulting  symptom  of  decreased  biomass  
(Abedin  et  al.  2002b)  was  caused  by  an  alteration  in  photosynthesis  (Tuli  et  al.  
2010). Arsenic toxicity degenerated the membrane structure and therefore affected  
the chloroplast as well as photosynthetic processes (Begum and Mondal 2019). The  
leaves  wilted  and  turned  violet  due  to  increased  anthocyanin  content  (Hossain  
2006). As a consequence, leaf tips and margins developed senescence and eventually  
necrosis (Das et al. 2013). Because of these symptoms, a lower photosynthetically  
active area occurred, which resulted in lower energy for the plant’s metabolism,  
leading to decreased plant height and stunted growth. 

4.3      Reproductive Growth  

The changes in the metabolism of the rice plant described in the previous section led  
to lower yield (Shah et al. 2014). Total yield loss was 80% when the soil contained  
more than 60 mg As/kg, but a significant loss was observed from 15 mg As/kg (Das  
et al. 2013). Yield decreased because of lower tiller number, which was observed in  
a treatment of 40 mg/kg arsenite(III) in a pot study (Das et al. 2013; Shah et al. 2014).  

This caused a lower number of filled and mature grains per panicle (Das et al. 2013).  
Another  physiological  disorder  that  has  been  associated  with  arsenic  toxicity  is  
straighthead  disease.  This  physiological  disorder  produces  sterile  florets  and  
spikelets and thereby diminishes grain yield (Rahman et al.  2008). A study with  
arsenate(V)-contaminated irrigation water showed rice plants with decreased plant  

height  and  grain  yield,  explained  by  a  lower  number  of  filled  grains  and  grain  
weight, and lower root biomass. At the same time, there was a significant increase  
in arsenic concentration in the root, straw, rice husk, and grain (Abedin et al. 2002b).  
The leaves can wilt and turn violet because of increased anthocyanin content (Abbas  
et al. 2018). Also, the chlorophyll content of seedling leaves decreased with both  

----------------------- Page 303-----------------------

292                                                                      V. Murugaiyan et al. 

arsenate(V) and arsenite(III). This observation explains the lower biomass and growth.  

Finally, leaf tips and margins develop necrosis (Abedin et al.  2002c; Zhao et al.  
2009). Roots show decreased biomass and lower root vigor. Grain yield decreases  
with decreased tiller number, filled grains, and panicles due to the sterility of florets  
and spikelets (Rao et al. 2011). Concerning metabolism, arsenic affects carbohydrate,  
lipid, and protein metabolism (Finnegan and Chen 2012). More importantly, arsenic  
can cause an increased formation of reactive oxygen species (ROS), exceeding the  
level that can be scavenged, thus leading to oxidative damage in the plant. Hydrogen  
peroxide (H O ), and malondialdehyde (CH (CHO) ) were the major ROS formed 2 2 2 2 
when rice seedlings were exposed to arsenate(V) (Rao et al. 2011). 

5     Quantitative Trait Loci Associated with Arsenic Stress  
     Tolerance in Rice 

Arsenic toxicity, uptake, and accumulation in rice represent a quantitative trait gov- 
erned by multiple loci (Dasgupta et al. 2004; Zhang et al. 2008; Murugaiyan et al.  
2019). Genetic improvement by the selection of rice cultivars with a lower concen- 
tration of arsenic in the edible parts is vital in the development of rice varieties  
accumulating low arsenic (Norton et al. 2012; Duan et al. 2017). Even though rice  
breeders have been particularly interested in developing cultivars accumulating low  
arsenic  for  contaminated  ecosystems,  no  promising  loci  have  been  functionally  
characterized for use in their breeding programs. Identification of appropriate rice  
cultivars and genetic mapping of chromosomal regions associated with a low-arse- 
nic concentration constitute a practical methodology for diminishing the impact of  
arsenic in rice. 
   Arsenic interaction with rice has remained well-documented over the past two  
decades.  Several  QTLs  have  been  reported  in  both  vegetative  tissues  and  grains  
(Table  1). More than a decade ago, Dasgupta et al. (2004) proposed the first QTL  
related to arsenate(V) uptake close to a phosphate (P) uptake QTL on chromosome 6  

and named the region AsTol (Dasgupta et al.  2004). This region covers multiple  
genes with various functions, and it needs to be fine-mapped to identify responsible  
genes  with  potential  for  rice  varieties  accumulating  low  arsenic.  Nonetheless,  
chromosome 6 has been identified to harbor several QTLs related to arsenic toxicity,  
even  though  these  QTLs  vary  in  their  physical  positions  (Dasgupta  et  al.  2004;  
Zhang  et  al.  2008;  Norton  et  al.  2012;  Kuramata  et  al.  2013;  Liu  et  al.  2019;  
Murugaiyan et al. 2019). QTLs on chromosome 6 were proposed to mediate arsenic  
concentration  in  the  grain  of  brown  rice  (Zhang  et  al.  2008)  and  the  DNA  
concentration of the grain (Kuramata et al. (2013). The previously mapped QTLs  
were closely colocalized to a QTL that mediates leaf arsenic concentration (Norton  
et  al.  2010a).  Recently,  another  QTL  responsible  for  arsenic  shoot  content  was  
found by Murugaiyan et al. (2019) on chromosome 6. These results indicated that  
the regions on chromosome 6 were involved in the uptake of arsenate(V). Several  

----------------------- Page 304-----------------------

Arsenic Stress Responses and Accumulation in Rice                                                    293 

genes on chromosome 6 were proposed to be involved in arsenite(III) transport: Lsi6  

(OsNIP2;2)  expressed  at  the  grain-filling  stage  and  plasma  membrane  intrinsic  
protein (OsPIPI2;7) (Kuramata et al. 2013; Liu et al. 2019). Murugaiyan et al. (2019)  
also identified a tolerance QTL (qRChlo 1) on chromosome 1 for relative chlorophyll  
content in a backcross-selected breeding population of rice, and qRChlo 1 increased  
the tolerance percentage of rice of arsenite(III) stress. However, none of these QTLs  

and genes has been functionally characterized for use in breeding programs for the  
development of varieties accumulating low arsenic. Chromosome 5 also contained  
regions  of  interest.  Norton  et  al.  (2010a)  found  a  QTL  associated  with  arsenic  
content in leaves on chromosome 5, but the soil at the study site had a low-arsenic  
concentration (<1 ppm). Also, Murugaiyan et al. (2019) identified the same QTL  
region on chromosome 5 for shoot arsenic concentration in a breeding population of  
rice. A heavy metal-associated domain-containing protein (HMA) was suggested as  
a candidate gene on chromosome 5. Those HMAs are associated with detoxifying  
heavy metals by containing a metal-binding domain and they have already been  
shown  to  help  in  the  metal  homeostasis  of  copper,  zinc,  lead,  and  cadmium  

Table 1   QTLs reported in rice for arsenic tolerance and accumulation 

                                                                                         Putative  
                        Phenotyping       As                                             QTLs on  
 Reference              under             concentration      Population used             chromosome 
 Dasgupta et al.        Hydroponic        1 mg As/kg         Bala (indica) × Azucena   6 
 (2004)                 culture           arsenate(V)        (japonica ) recombinant  

                        system                               inbred lines 
 Zhang et al. (2008)    Pot culture       1.27 mg As/kg      CJ06 (japonica ) × T1       2, 3, 6, 8 
                        system                               (indica) doubled-  
                                                             haploid population 
 Norton et al.          Field             0.32 mg As/kg      Bala (indica) × Azucena   1, 3, 5, 6 
 (2010a)                conditions                           (japonica ) recombinant  
                                                             inbred lines 
 Norton et al. (2012)   Field             73.8 mg As/kg      Bala (indica) × Azucena   8, 10 
                        conditions                           (japonica ) recombinant  
                                                             inbred lines 
 Kuramata et al.        Field             1.4 mg As/kg       69 accessions from          6, 8 
 (2013)                 conditions                           World Rice Collection 
 Norton et al. (2014)   Field             14 ± 0.3 mg As/    312 accessions from         3, 5 
                        conditions        kg                 Rice Diversity Panel 1 
 Liu et al. (2019)      Field             3000 mg As/kg      276 accessions from          1, 2, 4, 5, 9,  
                        conditions                           global Rice Diversity        11, 12 
                                                             Panel 
 Murugaiyan et al.      Hydroponic        10 mg As/kg        WTR1 (indica) × Hao-         1, 2, 5, 6, 8, 9 
 (2019)                 culture           arsenite(III)      an- nong (japonica )  

                        system                               backcross recombinant  
                                                             inbred breeding  
                                                             population 
 Norton et al. (2019)   Field             4.63 mg As/kg      266 Bengal Assam Aus        2, 3, 5, 7, 9 
                        conditions                           Panel 

----------------------- Page 305-----------------------

294                                                                               V. Murugaiyan et al. 

(Murugaiyan et al. 2019). However, their metal-binding ability toward arsenic has  
not been characterized in rice. 
    Besides chromosomes 6 and 5, chromosome 8 was found to harbor a few QTLs  
that  influence  grain  arsenic  content,  colocalizing  with  a  locus  affecting  shoot  
phosphorus concentration at the seedling stage of rice (Zhang et al.  2008; Norton  
et al. 2012; Kuramata et al. 2013). Also, a QTL related to the trait days to heading  
was found close to a QTL for grain arsenic content on chromosome 8, leading to the  
assumption  that  a  prolonged  time  of  the  vegetative  phase  could  decrease  grain  
arsenic content (Norton et al. 2012). Furthermore, a QTL that mediated grain DNA  
content was also localized on this chromosome (Kuramata et al. 2013). Chromosome  
3  was  also  identified  several  times  and  was  proposed  to  contain  a  QTL  that  
encompassed  Lsi2,  a  transporter  for  arsenite(III)  (Norton  et  al.   2012,  2019).  

Nonetheless, it is also important to identify QTLs associated with arsenic uptake as  
well as translocation, because, if no arsenic enters the plant or is safely stored, no  
arsenic will reach the grain. QTLs mediating root arsenic concentration were located  
on chromosomes 3 and 8 (Zhang et al. 2008; Murugaiyan et al. 2019). In order to  
estimate arsenic uptake and metabolism, measuring root As content was claimed to  
be a biased evaluation criterion due to arsenic residuals on the root surface (Zhang  
et al. 2008). More QTLs contributing to shoot arsenic concentration were found on  
chromosomes 2, 5, 6, and 9 (Zhang et al. 2008; Murugaiyan et al. 2019), and more  
precisely  for  the  arsenic  concentration  in  leaves  on  chromosomes  1,  3,  5,  and  6  
(Norton  et  al.  2010a). The  QTL  on  chromosome  2  covered  13  candidate  genes,  
                   + 
including an H  vacuolar pyrophosphatase, which is known to mediate changes in  
the concentration of essential and toxic ions (Murugaiyan et al. 2019). However, the  
QTLs mapped for arsenic tolerance in rice are not characterized for use in breeding  
programs for the development of arsenic-safe varieties. 

6      Arsenic Uptake in Rice 

As previously stated, arsenite(III) is the predominant form of arsenic in paddy soils.  

In order to develop rice varieties accumulating low arsenic, it is critical to understand  
the uptake, translocation, and underlying physiology of arsenic interaction with rice  
(Fig.  5). The  uptake  kinetics  of  both  inorganic  arsenic  species  were  similar  and  
followed  the  Michaelis–Menten  equation  (Lou  et  al.  2009). At  higher  substrate  
concentration, arsenite(III) had a higher uptake and was therefore assumed to have a  
low-affinity uptake system (Abedin et al.  2002a). Arsenite(III) and arsenate(V) have  
different ionic size and their uptake pathways differ (Zhao et al. 2013). Arsenite(III)  

resembles the silica ion in diameter and comparable acid-ionization constant value  
(pK ) (Jian et al.  2008). Arsenate(V) has a structure similar to the orthophosphate  
     a 

anion and their second and third pK  values are similar (O’Day 2006). Dimethylarsinic  
                                          a 

acid (DMA) and monomethylarsonic acid (MMA) are the most abundant forms of  
organic arsenic in paddy soil. They were a result of arsenite methylation facilitated  
by microorganisms (Wu et al. 2012). The uptake of organic arsenic species was the  

----------------------- Page 306-----------------------

Arsenic Stress Responses and Accumulation in Rice                                                                           295 

only way for DMA and MMA to enter the rice plant since rice cannot methylate  
arsenic  in  planta.  Instead,  methylation  occurred  in  the  presence  of  methylating  
microorganisms  in  the  rhizosphere  (Lomax  et  al.  2012).  Those  microorganisms  
need to contain the arsM (S-adenosylmethionine methyltransferase) gene in order to  
methylate arsenic (Jia et al. 2013). 

6.1       Arsenite Uptake  

Two major transporters were identified for arsenite(III) uptake in rice (Fig. 6). These  

transporters form part of the aquaporins family, belonging to the group of nodulin  
26-like intrinsic membrane proteins (NIPs) in rice (Jian et al. 2008). The aquaporins  
Lsi1 (OsNIP2;1) and Lsi2 were permeable only to arsenite(III) and usually mediated  

silicon influx and efflux. They differed in location and thus in their function. Lsi1  

                                                             Plant toxicity 
                                         Straighthead disease, stunted growth, chlorosis, and yield loss 
                                   Human health            High arsenic in grain        Cattle health 

                                           Class I  
                                         carcinogen                   High arsenic in   Environmental      Meat and dairy  
                                                                           straw 
                                                                                           pollution          products 

                                      As-contaminated  
                                       drinking water                                     Volatile As        Cattle feed 

                     As-high herbicide and  
                            pesticide                                                       Burning          Rice straw 
                                                   f 

    As-contaminated  
     irrigation water                                     OsHAC1.1&                                       Soil texture 
                                Aerenchyma-O2              OsHAC1.2 
     Anthropogenic                                                                                     Redox potential 
        activities                                                                                      Organic matter 
                                                                    OsHAC4 
      Groundwater          b      Fe+2 to Fe+3                                                                pH      a 
    As-contamination                                            Uptake As 
                                             Fe(OH) )                                   AsV       AsIII 
                                                       3     (Soil rhizosphere) 
     e                                                             Fe 
                                                                  Plaque ROS              d                Solubility 
                                                           c                                MMA 
       Involvement of 
         Fe, P, and Si  
                                                           Availability                      DMA 
       transporters and  
       phytohormones                   Epidermis,        Exodermis,      Cortex,      Endodermis,       Pericycle 

Fig. 5   Factors influencing arsenic availability and transportation from soil to rice plants: (a) the  
factors involved in solubility and available form of arsenic; (b) anaerobic conditions, rice roots of  
aerenchyma release a part of the O  to the rhizosphere complex; (c) formation of iron (Fe) plaques: 2 
Fe2+ oxidized to Fe3+ on the root surface and subsequent reaction of sulfhydryl-containing short  

peptides such as glutathione and phytochelatins binding to arsenic; (d) if more oxygen is released,  
this also may oxidize arsenite(III) to arsenate(V), which is more strongly adsorbed to iron plaque; (e)  
uptake of arsenate(V) is supported by various micronutrient transporters; (f) As-contaminated paddy  

soil influenced by different external factors, and effects of consumption of food grain and drinking  
water on human health 

----------------------- Page 307-----------------------

296                                                                           V. Murugaiyan et al. 

was responsible for the transport of arsenite(III) from the external solution to the root  

cells. It was located and expressed on the outside of the exodermis and endodermis  
close  to  the  Casparian  stripe.  The  transport  was  bidirectional,  indicating  that  
arsenite(III) could also efflux to the external medium via Lsi1 (Zhao et al.  2010b).  

However, there were more efflux transporters to be included (Zhao et al.  2010a).  
Lsi2 mediated the efflux of arsenite(III) toward the xylem and formed the counterpart  

of Lsi1 at the expression site. Lsi2 was expressed on the inner side of the plasma  
membranes of the exodermis and endodermis. From there, arsenite(III) was released  

into the cortex and stele. Lsi2 was considered to be more involved in the transport  
and translocation of arsenite(III) from shoot to grain (Jian et al. 2008). In the stele of  

primary roots and cell layers of lateral roots, more precisely in the plasma membrane,  
the  membrane  protein  OsNIP3;2  was  expressed,  which  also  belongs  to  the  NIP  
family. Arsenite(III) was also taken up and further transported through this protein  

(Chen et al. 2017). Besides the NIPs, plasma membrane intrinsic proteins (PIPs) are  
likely  to  play  a  role  in  arsenic  homeostasis  in  rice.  When  exposed  to  elevated  
arsenite(III) concentrations, the transcript concentrations in the roots were downregu- 

lated in order to prevent an increased arsenic uptake (Mosa et al. 2012). 

Fig. 6   Schematic representation of arsenic uptake and translocation in rice 

----------------------- Page 308-----------------------

Arsenic Stress Responses and Accumulation in Rice                                                                    297 

6.2       Arsenate Uptake  

Arsenate(V) is a chemical analog of phosphate ions and takes advantage of the phos- 
phorus transport pathway. In the presence of phosphate, the uptake of arsenate(V)  
was actively suppressed, whereas arsenite(III) was not (Abedin et al.  2002a). This  
finding was a clear indicator that arsenate(V) used phosphorus transporters (Pht). On  

a  molecular  level,  the  Pht  family,  comprising  13  genes,  was  associated  with  
phosphate transport in rice (Wang et al.  2016). Some of the transporter function  
genes were investigated concerning arsenate(V) uptake. OsPT8 (OsPht1;8) mediated  

phosphorus  homeostasis  and  was  also  considered  as  a  critical  transporter  for  
arsenate(V)  uptake  in  rice  roots  (Wang  et  al.  2016).  A  role  for  the  uptake  and  
translocation of arsenate(V) in rice was demonstrated by expression analysis of the  

OsPT4 transporter gene. The overexpression of this gene resulted in higher arsenic  
accumulation  when  grown  in  arsenate(V)  solution  (Chao  et  al.  2014).  Lsi1  also  
played an essential role in the uptake of arsenate(V) since it was found that arsenite(III)  
was effluxed through this channel when rice roots were exposed to arsenate(V) (Zhao  

et al. 2010a). 

7       Arsenic Translocation in Rice 

The translocation of arsenic depends on its concentration, its capability of complex- 
ation, and its sequestration as well as the xylem flow rate (Suriyagoda et al. 2018).  
In general, the concentration of arsenic in rice decreases in the following order:  
root > straw > husk > grain (Abedin et al. 2002b). Translocation of arsenic species  
from root to shoot to grain also depends on the genotype and growth stage. In gen- 
eral, grain arsenic content was found to be affected by genotype, year, and geno- 
type × year interaction effects (Kuramata et al. 2013). A higher-yielding variety was  
found to be capable of translocating more arsenic from root to shoot and also from  
shoot  to  grain  than  traditionally  grown  landraces  (Bhattacharya  et  al.  2010).  
Genotypes that varied in grain arsenic accumulation were found to have different  
arsenic  content  in  all  plant  tissues  (Duan  et  al.  2011).  Furthermore,  there  was  
evidence  that  translocation  mainly  took  place  at  the  active  tillering  stage  (Das  
et al. 2013). 

7.1       Arsenite Translocation  

The phloem plays a significant role in arsenic translocation from the vegetative tis- 
sue to the grain. Arsenite(III) was translocated to the vegetative tissue, capable of  

being  remobilized  and  transported  to  the  grain  through  the  phloem  (Fig.  7). An  
explanation  for  this  phloem  loading  might  be  a  transfer  of  arsenic  in  the  xylem  

----------------------- Page 309-----------------------

298                                                                                                 V. Murugaiyan et al. 

vessels into the phloem (Zhao et al. 2012). The phloem transferred 90% of arsenite(III)  

and 55% of DMA to the grain (Carey et al.  2010). Inorganic arsenic was mostly  
found  in  the  caryopsis  and  transported  during  the  grain-filling  stage.  DMA  
accumulated in the caryopsis before flowering (Zhao et al. 2012). The mechanism  
by which arsenite(III) is remobilized and further transported is not known yet. Arsenic  

could be stored in the nodes and internodes of rice, where arsenic accumulation was  
observed in the phloem companion cells. From there, translocation to the grain and  
flag  leaf  was  restricted.  This  capability  of  the  nodes  was  explained  by  a  higher  
expression of Lsi2 and the formation of arsenite(III)-thiol compounds in the vacuole  

(Chen et al.  2016).  OsABCC1 was also included in the storage of arsenic in the  
nodes by sequestering it in the vacuoles of the phloem companion cells (Song et al.  
2014). The  phytochelatin  synthase  OsPCS1  might  play  a  supportive  role  in  this  
process, as it reduced arsenic grain contents when overexpressed (Hayashi et al.  
2017).  In  the  basal  and  upper  nodes,  the  transcription  factor  OsARM1  (Arsenite  
Responsive MYB 1) was strongly expressed in the phloem region when exposed to  
high-arsenite(III) concentrations. It also showed high expression in the rachis and  

spikelet  and  was  likely  to  be  involved  in  mediating  uptake  and  root-to-shoot  
translocation (Wang et al. 2017). Those findings indicate that translocation through  
the phloem is more critical than translocation through the xylem. 

7.2       Arsenate Translocation  

It is widely assumed that arsenate(V) is directly reduced to arsenite(III) in the root.  

Seyfferth et al. (2011) showed that oxidized arsenic species were the predominant  
form in the xylem within a root cross-section. This was supported by the assumption  
that the uptake of the two inorganic arsenic species occurred at different locations in  
the root. However, genotype-dependent variation was also observed (Seyfferth et al.  
2011). Another fact that disproved the reduction assumption was that straw contained  
mostly arsenate(V) after growing in an arsenate(V) solution for 170 days (Abedin et al.  
2002a). The high abundance of arsenate(V) could be explained by the limited capacity  
of the reducing enzymes  OsHAC1;1 and  OsHAC1;2, thus not reducing arsenate(V)  

                     III 
AsV    AsIII     As               ?AsIII                                                        AsIII        Lsi2      As 
AsIII  AsV     AsIII      Lsi1                     AsIII                                    Vacuole 

                                       III 
AsV    AsIII   AsIII   OsNIP3;2     As 

                                                              Arsenite-                  Arsenite-thiol  
AsIII  AsV        V     OsPT8          V  Glutathione OsPCS1  thiol  OsABCC1             complex 
AsV    AsIII   As                  As     Glutaredoxin OsPCS2  complex 

    III                                   OsHAC1;1     III 
As     AsV     AsV      OsPT4       AsV   OsHAC1;2  As 
AsV    AsIII                              OsHAC4                    ? 
AsIII  AsV       AsV      Lsi1      AsV                                                     ?                          As 

Fig. 7   Schematic representation of arsenic uptake and storage in a cell 

----------------------- Page 310-----------------------

Arsenic Stress Responses and Accumulation in Rice                                             299 

anymore  (Shi  et  al.  2016).  Nonetheless,  as  soon  as  inorganic  arsenic  was  in  the  
xylem,  it  became  transported  to  the  vegetative  parts.  Nodulin  26-like  intrinsic  
membrane proteins that were included in the translocation of arsenite(III) from root  

to  shoot  included  OsNIP1;1  and  OsNIP3;3,  which  caused  a  decreased  arsenic  
concentration in shoot and xylem when overexpressed. OsNIP1;1 was expressed in  
the  basal  stem  at  the  seedling  and  tillering  stages.  At  maturity,  it  was  mostly  
expressed in the roots, basal stem, nodes, and spikelets. In contrast, OsNIP3;3 was  
expressed continuously in different tissues (Sun et al.  2018). For the transport of  
arsenate(V) from root to shoot, the expression level of  OsPT1 was investigated. It  
was increased after different phosphate (P) and arsenate(V) treatments in seedlings,  

which  indicated  its  facilitating  role  for  the  transport  (Kamiya  et  al.  2013).  
OsWRKY28, a transcription factor of the  WRKY family that is mostly involved in  
stress tolerance, was found to contribute to the translocation of arsenate(V) from root  

to shoot (Wang et al. 2017). 

8     Arsenic Detoxification and Stress Responses in Rice 

Arsenic  does  not  have  any  known  biological  function  within  the  rice  plant,  and  
enhanced uptake triggers various defense mechanisms in the plant to mitigate the  
negative impact of arsenic stress. Once arsenate(V) was taken up into the cell, it was  
reduced to arsenite(III), which was the dominant form inside the plant tissue (Ali  

et al. 2009). The reduction was a slow process mediated by glutaredoxin (Suriyagoda  
et al. 2018). Enzymatic reduction of arsenate(V) was performed more likely by the  
arsenate(V) reductase gene High Arsenic Content (HAC) (Chao et al. 2014). In rice,  

OsHAC1;1, OsHAC1;2, and OsHAC4 played a significant role in this process (Shi  
et  al.  2016). They  were  most  commonly  expressed  in  the  roots.  OsHAC1;1  was  
found in the epidermis, pericycle cells, and root hairs in the mature zone of roots.  
OsHAC1;2  was  most  abundant  in  the  epidermis,  exodermis,  outer  layer  of  the  
cortex, and endodermis cells (Shi et al. 2016). OsHAC4 was expressed in the root  
epidermis and exodermis (Xu et al.  2017). By overexpression, knocking out, and  
xylem sap analysis, it was established that they were included in the reduction of  
arsenate(V) to arsenite(III) and in the efflux of arsenite(III) to the external medium (Shi  
et  al.  2016).  Detoxification  of  the  reduced  arsenate(V)  and  the  readily  available  
arsenite(III) was maintained by glutathione-based phytochelatins (PCs). Glutathione  

acts as a precursor for PCs, and its role in arsenic tolerance was corroborated by a  
study  with  a  sulfur  supplement  treatment.  It  was  pointed  out  that  most  of  the  
arsenate(V)  remained  in  the  root,  promoting  the  importance  of  phytochelatins  in  
binding arsenic (Dixit et al.  2016). The same can be stated for arsenite(III), which  

complexes with PCs, lowering its mobility from shoot to grain (Duan et al. 2011).  
They are also referred to as arsenite(III)-thiol complexes. An essential contribution to  

this mechanism was suggested for phytochelatin synthase  OsPCS1 and  OsPCS2,  
whereby the former was more expressed in the roots under arsenite(III) treatment and  

the  latter  was  identified  to  be  an  essential  isozyme  controlling  PC  synthesis  

----------------------- Page 311-----------------------

300                                                                              V. Murugaiyan et al. 

(Yamazaki  et  al.  2018).  Arsenite(III)-thiol  complexes  were  transported  from  the  

cytoplasm into the vacuole by a member of the C-type ATP-binding cassette (ABC)  
transporter  (OsABCC)  family,  OsABCC1  (Song  et  al.  2014).  In  the  vacuole,  the  
complexes  could  be  sequestered  efficiently  since  the  acidic  pH  of  5.5  stabilized  
them  (Ali  et  al.  2009;  Suriyagoda  et  al.  2018).  It  was  assumed  that  the  same  
transporters and detoxification mechanisms as in the root cell were used for storing  
arsenic after relocation, but this is not well investigated yet (Zhao et al.  2010b).  
Here,  the  same  detoxification  mechanism  was  used  again  to  store  arsenic  in  the  
vacuole (Suriyagoda et al. 2018). A study with radioactively labeled arsenic during  
the grain-filling stage showed that arsenite(III) was somewhat immobile in the xylem  

within the rice plant, probably because of its complexation and sequestration (Zhao  
et al. 2012). The silica pathway might not be used when translocating and unloading  
arsenite(III) into the grain since silica mainly accumulated in the husk and not in the  

grain  (Norton  et  al.  2010b).  However,  the  addition  of  silica  decreased  inorganic  
grain arsenic content but increased DMA, by 59% and 33%, respectively (Li et al.  
2009).  In  contrast,  arsenate(V)  was  proposed  to  use  the  phosphorus  pathway  

throughout the whole transport and translocation (Norton et al. 2010b). 

8.1      The Oxidative Stress Response in Rice 

Concerning  metabolism,  carbohydrate-,  lipid-,  protein-,  amino  acid-,  ascorbate-,  
and aldarate-related pathways were affected by arsenic uptake (Abbas et al. 2018).  
Membrane transport, cell growth, and death, as well as biodegradation were also  
altered by showing an up- or down-regulation of gene function (Dubey et al. 2014).  
When conducting a genome-wide expression study, several gene families were up-  
and down-regulated when grown in arsenite(III), especially facilitating transporters,  

stress-related  genes,  regulatory  proteins,  growth,  and  development,  as  well  as  
secondary metabolism. This finding indicated arsenite(III)-induced oxidative stress  

(Chakrabarty et al. 2009). More importantly, arsenic triggers an increased formation  
of reactive oxygen species (ROS) and therefore not all of them could be scavenged,  
thus  leading  to  plant  damage.  Hydrogen  peroxide  (H O )  was  an  ROS  that  was 2 2 
formed when rice seedlings were exposed to arsenate(V) (Choudhury et al.  2011).  
Arsenite(III)  was  found  to  promote  the  development  of  different  ROS,  namely,  
superoxide anion (O •−)  and H O , thus inducing lipid peroxidation in rice seedlings  
                         2            2  2 

(Mishra et al. 2011). To prevent an excessive amount of H O , seedling roots grown 2 2 
in arsenate(V) solution increased ascorbate peroxidase (APX) activity, which reduced  

H O  via the ascorbate-glutathione cycle (Dubey et al.  2014). For scavenging the 2 2 
ROS  occurring  under  arsenite(III),  the  concentrations  of  enzymatic  antioxidants  

superoxide dismutase (SOD), catalase (CAT), chloroplastic ascorbate peroxidase,  
guaiacol peroxidase, monodehydroascorbate reductase, and glutathione reductase  
increased. Higher concentrations of ascorbate and glutathione were found, and the  
synthesis of phytochelatins and total acid-soluble thiols was enhanced in arsenic-  
treated seedlings (Mishra et al.  2011). Besides ROS, altered RNase and protease  

----------------------- Page 312-----------------------

Arsenic Stress Responses and Accumulation in Rice                                                                          301 

activity were also an indicator of stress. Their activity was inhibited by the presence  
of arsenite(III), thus leading to high abundance of RNA and proteins. However, an  

increase in proline was also reported (Choudhury et al. 2011). Proline is an osmolyte,  
and its accumulation was usually found under salinity or drought stress (Amini et al.  
2015). Under arsenic stress, its abundance led to the assumption that proline could  
help to protect enzymes in the presence of arsenite(III) (Mishra and Dubey  2006).  

The same can be reported for heat shock proteins (HSPs), generally formed under a  
rapid temperature increase, water deficit, or salinity (Ponomarenko et al. 2013). In  
the   presence   of   arsenic,   several   HSP   genes   were   upregulated   (Chakrabarty  
et al. 2009). 

8.2       Root Plaque Formation as a Scavenger for Arsenic Stress  

Despite anaerobic conditions in paddy fields, the rhizosphere can be aerobic due to  
the semiaquatic characteristic of rice forming an aerenchyma when flooded. From  
there, oxygen is released by the roots, forming an oxidation barrier. This leads to the  
formation of iron plaque, visible by the reddish coating around the roots, caused by  
a  reoxidation  of  Fe(II)  to  Fe(III)  (Becker  and  Asch  2005).  Iron  plaque  is  mostly  

composed of lepidocrocite, goethite, and ferrihydrite (Seyfferth et al. 2011). It was  
proposed that the same reoxidation mechanism and an additional formation of iron  
plaque would decrease the uptake of arsenic (Lee et al. 2013). This hypothesis could  
not be confirmed since the proportion of the newly formed arsenate(V) in a hydroponic  

solution was very low (Liu et al. 2010). Rice genotypes with a higher radial oxygen  
loss  showed  a  higher  formation  of  iron  plaque.  This  led  to  a  lower  uptake  of  
arsenate(V) and hence to a lower concentration of total inorganic arsenic in the plant  

(Wu  et  al.  2012).  However,  iron  plaque  distribution  was  not  homogeneously  
covering  total  roots.  Indeed,  young  roots  showed  little  iron  plaque  formation.  
Therefore, iron plaque was assumed to be a bulk scavenger for arsenic since it was  
absent  in  the  main  solute-uptake  root  area  (Seyfferth  et  al.  2011).  In  general,  
arsenate(V) was absorbed more than arsenite(III), and arsenite(III) was desorbed more  

rapidly  (Geng  et  al.  2017).  Surprisingly,  the  formation  of  iron  plaque  enhanced  
arsenite(III) uptake, but, in this experiment, the iron plaque was formed first and then  
the plants were exposed to arsenite(III)/arsenate(V). This practice cannot be transferred  

to natural field conditions (Liu et al. 2010). The addition of phosphorus increased  
the uptake of arsenate(V) irrespective of iron plaque (Geng et al.  2005; Yang et al.  

2020).  This  could  be  explained  because  phosphorus  might  have  occupied  the  
sorption space at the iron plaque, thus releasing more arsenate(V). 
     In conclusion, iron plaque could act as a buffer for arsenate(V) uptake (Liu et al.  
2010).  Concerning  a  decreased  arsenite(III)  uptake,  manganese  (Mn)  plaque  was  
shown to be more effective in capturing arsenite(III) than iron plaque as shown by the  

lower  shoot  arsenic  concentration.  However,  the  control  treatment  without  any  
plaque formation also showed lower shoot arsenic concentration. Therefore, the role  
of manganese plaque needs to be further investigated (Liu et al. 2010). In contrast  

----------------------- Page 313-----------------------

302                                                                         V. Murugaiyan et al. 

to   the   results   identified   by   hydroponic   studies,   a   microcosm   study   with   a  
contaminated soil from Bangladesh containing 14 mg As/kg dry weight showed that  
iron plaque indeed prevented uptake, leading to lower shoot arsenic concentration  
(Huang et al. 2012b). 

9     State of Knowledge Gaps for Arsenic Accumulation in Rice 

In the past two decades, some progress has been made in understanding the physi- 
ological and molecular mechanisms of arsenic metabolism in rice. The regulation  
and transportation of arsenic from soil to plants are associated with multiple factors:  
soil texture, water availability, arsenic bioavailability, genotype used, arsenic inter- 
actions with other heavy metals and essential minerals, rice ecosystem, microbial  
interaction,  physiological  activities,  and  genotype-by- environment  interactions  
(Norton et al. 2012; Sahoo and Mukherjee 2014) (Fig. 5). Among these factors, the  
selection of rice cultivars with low-arsenic content in grain and straw is the most  
efficient and practical approach for decreasing arsenic contamination in rice. The  
molecular genetic mechanisms of arsenic accumulation in the root, shoot, and grain  
need to be understood clearly for designing efficient breeding strategies and devel- 
oping  elite  breeding  materials,  which  combine  arsenic  tolerance,  low-arsenic  
uptake, and high-grain yield. 
    Several  experiments  were  conducted  to  understand  the  physiological  mecha- 
nisms  underlying  rice  varieties  accumulating  low  arsenic  (Norton  et  al.  2012;  
Murugaiyan et al. 2019). However, some of them show inconsistency and method- 
ological errors, leading to wrong assumptions. Many studies focused on arsenate(V)  
rather than arsenite(III) although arsenite(III) is the predominant form in paddy soils,  

where the majority of rice is produced. Abedin et al. (2002a) were the first to elu- 
cidate that arsenite(III) and arsenate(V) take advantage of different uptake mecha- 

nisms in rice. After this finding, the focus should have been more toward elevated  
arsenite(III) concentrations in rice experiments, which was not the case. When iden- 
tifying the AsTol QTL on chromosome 6, 1 ppm of arsenate(V) was used (Dasgupta  

et  al.  2004).  When  investigating  the  accumulation  in  widely  used  cultivars  in  
Bangladesh, the soil was obtained from the Bangladesh Rice Research Institute  
(BRRI) and enriched with arsenate(V) rather than arsenite(III). There, they found that  

a  hybrid  variety  accumulated  the  most  arsenic  in  the  straw  at  a  treatment  of  
30 mg As/kg, using Na HAsO  · 7H O. It was stated that the hybrid variety would 2 4 2 
show a higher phytotoxicity and accumulation ability (Rahman et al. 2007). This  
finding needs to be proven when the soil is enriched with arsenite(III) because, oth- 

erwise,  the  hybrid  could  contain  a  more  efficient  phosphorus-uptake  pathway,  
which  arsenate(V)  took  advantage  of. When  estimating  the  grain  arsenic  content  
determined in different soil arsenic concentrations, arsenate(V) was used to enrich  

the soil (Rahman et al. 2008). It cannot be clearly stated how important the differ- 
ence between using arsenate(V) and arsenite(III) really is unless both forms are tested  

in the same experiment. Another shortcoming, especially when finding QTLs, is  

----------------------- Page 314-----------------------

Arsenic Stress Responses and Accumulation in Rice                                           303 

when  a  low-arsenic  concentration  is  used. The  concentration  in  the  experiment  
should  simulate  field  conditions  with  typical  concentrations  of  4–8  mg/kg.  
Therefore, a concentration of less than 1 ppm cannot lead to reliable results (Abedin  
et al. 2002a; Norton et al. 2010a). Most of the published studies related to arsenic  
uptake and accumulation were carried out in a hydroponics system or pot culture,  
and  these  experiments  need  to  be  carried  out  in  a  contaminated  field  for  better  
understanding. 
   Rice production in the major rice-growing countries is shifting toward more effi- 
cient technologies such as direct-seeded rice (DSR) and alternate wetting and dry- 
ing (AWD) (Pathak et al. 2011; Richards and Sander 2014). It is essential to identify  
suitable genotypes, genes, and QTLs associated with overcoming arsenic contami- 
nation under these technologies. The presence of flooded water influences arsenic  
speciation. It is crucial to use arsenate(V) for conducting experiments related to dry- 
DSR conditions and arsenite(III) for wet-DSR conditions. So far, no experiment has  

been conducted to observe the germination ability of rice under DSR conditions in  
contaminated soils. AWD technology was proposed to decrease arsenic content in  
rice. However, no studies have been conducted to observe how arsenic species acted  
when applying AWD technology. Since arsenic translocation from soil depends on  
flooding, it is understood that, during the wetting period, arsenite(III) dominates, and,  
during the drying period, arsenate(V) dominates. However, no data were available to  

validate this observation. 

10      Possible Mitigation Strategies for Arsenic  
       Accumulation in Rice 

Several  novel  methodologies  in  rice  cooking  provided  promising  results  for  a  
decrease in arsenic content by using a continual flow of clean water over the raw  
rice before cooking (Carey et al. 2015). Carey et al. (2015) stated that about 85% of  
the inorganic arsenic was removed from the raw rice by using a continual flow of  
clean cooking water. Several researchers also found that using a higher water-to-rice  
ratio  for  cooking,  followed  by  removal  of  the  extra  water  (starch),  significantly  
decreased the arsenic in cooked rice (Sengupta et al. 2006; Stanton et al. 2015). For  
instance, Sengupta et al. (2006) reported a decrease in arsenic by 57% by washing  
the rice grain several times until the water looks transparent/clear, and a cooking  
process with a 6:1 ratio of water to rice grain with draining of the excess water.  
However,  the  effect  of  this  procedure  on  the  content  of  essential  water-soluble  
nutrients such as minerals or B-vitamins remains to be elucidated. 
    Selection  of  existing  rice  cultivars  that  are  biologically  restricted  in  terms  of  
arsenic accumulation in the grain offers great potential for use in breeding programs,  
as   some   rice   cultivars   can   accumulate   20–30-fold   less   arsenic   than   others  
(Murugaiyan et al. 2019). The physiological pathways and molecular genetics of  
arsenic accumulation in rice were linked to many QTLs and genes involved in the  
uptake and translocation of arsenic in rice (Dasgupta et al. 2004; Tuli et al. 2010).  

----------------------- Page 315-----------------------

304                                                                       V. Murugaiyan et al. 

Still, a gap exists in identifying the candidate genes and allelic variants of the genes  
governing low-arsenic content in rice grain. Using recent trends of allele mining and  
haplotype breeding technologies can help to limit arsenic accumulation in the grain,  
which is a prerequisite for breeding programs to develop low-arsenic-accumulating  
rice  cultivars  (Murugaiyan  et  al.  2019).  Hence,  several  strategies  are  possible  to  
decrease arsenic in rice grains, including the following: 

 1.  Mitigation strategies related to rice cooking can help to decrease arsenic content  
    in the major staple food crop, rice. The ratio of rice grain for cooking, the amount  
    of water used for washing, cooking vessels, and duration of the cooking process  
    can decrease the arsenic in cooked rice (Carey et al. 2015). 
 2.  Supplementation of mineral nutrient elements such as S, P, Fe, and Si can also  
    significantly  diminish  the  accumulation  of  arsenic  content  in  rice  grain  by  
    minimizing its uptake and transport in food crops. For instance, P and Si are  
    complementary  in  nature  to  arsenic  in  competing  for  uptake.  Therefore,  the  
    external application of these mineral nutrients decreases the chances of arsenic  
    uptake from the soil (Alkorta et al. 2004; Jian et al. 2008). 
 3.  Water-saving  technologies  such  as  direct-seeded  rice  cultivation  are  viable,  
    immediate, and sustainable solutions for decreasing arsenic content in rice (Hu  
    et al.  2013; Abedin et al. 2002a). Talukder et al. (2011) reported that arsenic  
    uptake in rice plants (0.23–0.26 mg/kg) is lower with aerobic water management  
    than in anaerobic rice cultivation (0.60–0.67 mg/kg). 
 4.  The identification of donors/selection of rice cultivars with low arsenic can mini- 
    mize the risk of arsenic associated with human diseases and be eco-friendly to  
    nature (Norton et al. 2012). 
 5.  The development of breeding lines through the introgression of QTLs and genes  
    for  low  arsenic  into  elite  rice  cultivars  can  ensure  high-grain  yield  and  low-  
    arsenic content in cultivars suitable for cultivation in arsenic-contaminated soils  
    (Murugaiyan et al. 2019). 
 6.  CRISPR/Cas9-based genome-editing tools can be useful for modifying crucial-  
    regulated genes (OsPht1:8, Lsi1, OsNRAMP1, and OsABCC1) for the interruption  
    or  modification  of  genes  that  regulate  pathways  contributing  to  low-arsenic  
    accumulation in rice grain. Targeting the genes involved in the phloem transport  
    mechanism and nodes could be crucial for transporting to rice grain (Song et al.  
    2014). Thus, identifying phloem-localized transporters and their manipulation  
    will  provide  a  promising  approach  toward  decreasing  arsenic  accumulation  
    in grain. 

11      Future Directions and Conclusions 

The nature of arsenic being redox-active, highly toxic to organisms, and its ten- 
dency to be methylated make it a complex and important mineral to study. Arsenic  
uptake  and  metabolism  in  rice  need  to  be  placed  in  the  broader  context  of  

----------------------- Page 316-----------------------

Arsenic Stress Responses and Accumulation in Rice                                              305 

biogeochemical cycling of arsenic in the environment. Bioavailability and specia- 
tion of arsenic in the soil are strongly dependent on environmental conditions, and  
this knowledge is crucial as it determines the extent of arsenic accumulation by rice  
and the consequences of arsenic contamination in the food chain. The widespread  
arsenic contamination in the environment, the mobilization of arsenic into rice grain  
even in soils with baseline arsenic concentrations, and the realization that excessive  
arsenic accumulation in rice can present a health risk to humans have provided a  
recent impetus in research on this subject. Therefore, significant progress has been  
made in recent years to understand arsenic uptake, speciation, and detoxification in  
plants. However, substantial knowledge gaps exist on the mechanisms of arsenic  
sequestration in the vacuoles and for arsenic loading and unloading in xylem and  
phloem. Still, there is a need to understand the regulation of arsenic accumulation in  
grain and to unravel the pathways and enzymes responsible for arsenate(V) reduction  

and methylation. Recent advances in the analytical techniques for arsenic speciation  
are instrumental in enhancing our understanding of arsenic biogeochemical cycling  
and plant metabolism. Combining these analytical tools with molecular genetics  
and  functional  genomics  should  provide  ample  opportunities  for  unraveling  the  
mechanisms of arsenic transport, metabolism, and regulation. 

References 

Abbas G, Murtaza B, Bibi I et al (2018) Arsenic uptake, toxicity, detoxification, and speciation  
    in plants: physiological, biochemical, and molecular aspects. Int J Environ Res Public Health  
    15:59. https://doi.org/10.3390/ijerph15010059 
Abedin  MJ,  Cotter-Howells  J,  Meharg  AA  (2002a)  Arsenic  uptake  and  accumulation  in  rice  
    (Oryza sativa L.) irrigated with contaminated water. Plant Soil 240:311–319. https://doi.org/1 
    0.1023/A:1015792723288 
Abedin MJ, Cresser MS, Meharg AA et al (2002b) Arsenic accumulation and metabolism in rice  
    (Oryza sativa L.). Environ Sci Technol 36:962–968. https://doi.org/10.1021/es0101678 
Abedin MJ, Feldmann J, Meharg AA (2002c) Uptake kinetics of arsenic species in rice plants.  
    Plant Physiol 128:1120–1128. https://doi.org/10.1104/pp.010733 
Abernathy C, Chakraborti D, Edmonds JS et al (2001) Environmental health criteria for arsenic  
    and arsenic compounds. Environ health criteria 224. WHO, Geneva 
Ali W, Isayenkov SV, Zhao FJ, Maathuis FJM (2009) Arsenite transport in plants. Cell Mol Life  
    Sci 66:2329–2339. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00018- 009- 0021- 7 
Ali J, Aslam UM, Tariq R et al (2018a) Exploiting the genomic diversity of rice (Oryza sativa L.):  
    SNP-typing in 11 early-backcross introgression-breeding populations. Front Plant Sci 9:849.  
    https://doi.org/10.3389/fpls.2018.00849 
Ali J, Jewel ZA, Mahender A et al (2018b) Molecular genetics and breeding for nutrient use effi- 
    ciency in rice. Int J Mol Sci 19:1762. https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms19061762 
Alkorta I, Hernández-Allica J, Becerril JM et al (2004) Recent findings on the phytoremediation of  
    soils contaminated with environmentally toxic heavy metals and metalloids such as zinc, cad- 
    mium, lead, and arsenic. Rev Environ Sci Biotechnol 3:71–90. https://doi.org/10.1023/B:RES 
    B.0000040059.70899.3d 
Amini M, Abbaspour KC, Berg M et al (2008) Statistical modeling of global geogenic arsenic  
    contamination  in  groundwater.  Environ  Sci  Technol  42:3669–3675.  https://doi.org/10.1021/ 
    es702859e 
Amini S, Ghobadi C, Yamchi A (2015) Proline accumulation and osmotic stress: an overview of  
    P5CS gene in plants. Genet Agric Biotechnol Inst Tabarestan 3:44–55 

----------------------- Page 317-----------------------

306                                                                                  V. Murugaiyan et al. 

Anawar HM, Akai J, Komaki K et al (2003) Geochemical occurrence of arsenic in groundwater of  
    Bangladesh: sources and mobilization processes. J Geochem Explor 77:109–131. https://doi. 
    org/10.1016/S0375- 6742(02)00273- X 
Ashikari M, Ma JF (2015) Exploring the power of plants to overcome environmental stresses. Rice  
    8:10. https://doi.org/10.1186/s12284- 014- 0037- y 
Becker M, Asch F (2005) Iron toxicity in rice:conditions and management concepts. J Plant Nutr  
    Soil Sci 168:558–573 
Begum M, Mondal S (2019) Relative toxicity of arsenite and arsenate on early seedling growth  
    and photosynthetic pigments of rice. Curr J Appl Sci Technol 33:1–5. https://doi.org/10.9734/ 
    cjast/2019/v33i430087 
Bewley   JD   (1997)   Seed   germination   and   dormancy.   Plant   Cell   9:1055–1066.  https://doi. 
    org/10.1105/tpc.9.7.1055 
Bhattacharya P, Samal AC, Majumdar J, Santra SC (2010) Accumulation of arsenic and its dis- 
    tribution in rice plant (Oryza sativa L.) in Gangetic West Bengal, India. Paddy Water Environ  
    8:63–70. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10333- 009- 0180- z 
Bondu R, Cloutier V, Rosa E, Benzaazoua M (2016) A review and evaluation of the impacts of  
    climate change on geogenic arsenic in groundwater from fractured bedrock aquifers. Water Air  
    Soil Pollut 227:296. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11270- 016- 2936- 6 
Brammer  H,  Ravenscroft  P  (2009)  Arsenic  in  groundwater:  a  threat  to  sustainable  agricul- 
    ture  in  South  and  South-east  Asia.  Environ  Int  35:647–654.  https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
    envint.2008.10.004 
Caldwell  BK,  Caldwell  JC,  Mitra  SN,  Smith  W  (2003)  Searching  for  an  optimum  solution  
    to   the   Bangladesh   arsenic   crisis.   Soc   Sci   Med   56:2089–2096.   https://doi.org/10.1016/ 
    S0277- 9536(02)00203- 4 
Carbonell-Barrachina  Á,  Munera-Picazo  S,  Cano-Lamadrid  M  et  al  (2015)  Arsenic  in  your  
    food:  potential  health  hazards  from  arsenic  found  in  rice.  Nutr  Diet  Suppl  7:1.  https://doi. 
    org/10.2147/nds.s52027 
Carey AM, Scheckel KG, Lombi E et al (2010) Grain unloading of arsenic species in rice. Plant  
    Physiol 152:309–319. https://doi.org/10.1104/pp.109.146126 
Carey M, Jiujin X, Farias JG, Meharg AA (2015) Rethinking rice preparation for highly efficient  
    removal of inorganic arsenic using percolating cooking water. PLoS One 10:e0131608. https:// 
    doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0131608 
Chakrabarty D, Trivedi PK, Misra P et al (2009) Comparative transcriptome analysis of arsenate  
    and  arsenite  stresses  in  rice  seedlings.  Chemosphere  74:688–702.  https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
    chemosphere.2008.09.082 
Chakraborti D, Rahman MM, Das B et al (2013) Groundwater arsenic contamination in Ganga-  
    Meghna- Brahmaputra plain, its health effects and an approach for mitigation. Environ Earth  
    Sci 70:1993–2008. https://doi.org/10.1007/s12665- 013- 2699- y 
Chao DY, Chen Y, Chen J et al (2014) Genome-wide association mapping identifies a new arsenate  
    reductase enzyme critical for limiting arsenic accumulation in plants. PLoS Biol 12:e1002009.  
    https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pbio.1002009 
Chen WQ, Shi YL, Wu SL, Zhu YG (2016) Anthropogenic arsenic cycles: a research framework  
    and features. J Clean Prod 139:328–336. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2016.08.050 
Chen Y, Sun SK, Tang Z et al (2017) The nodulin 26-like intrinsic membrane protein  OsNIP3;2  
    is involved in arsenite uptake by lateral roots in rice. J Exp Bot 68:3007–3016.  https://doi. 
    org/10.1093/jxb/erx165 
Choudhury B, Chowdhury S, Biswas AK (2011) Regulation of growth and metabolism in rice  
    (Oryza sativa L.) by arsenic and its possible reversal by phosphate. J Plant Interact 6:15–24.  
    https://doi.org/10.1080/17429140903487552 
Clemens S (2006) Toxic metal accumulation, responses to exposure and mechanisms of tolerance  
    in plants. Biochimie 88:1707–1719 
Clemens S, Ma JF (2016) Toxic heavy metal and metalloid accumulation in crop plants and foods.  
    Annu Rev Plant Biol 67:489–512. https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev- arplant- 043015- 112301 

----------------------- Page 318-----------------------

Arsenic Stress Responses and Accumulation in Rice                                                      307 

Das B, Nayak B, Pal A et al (2008) Groundwater arsenic contamination and its health effects in the  
    Ganga-Meghna-Brahmaputra plain. In: Groundwater for sustainable development: problems,  
    perspectives and challenges. Routledge, London, pp 257–269 
Das  I,  Ghosh  K,  Das  DK,  Sanya  SK  (2013)  Assessment  of  arsenic  toxicity  in  rice  plants  
    in  areas  of  West  Bengal.  Chem  Speciat  Bioavailab  25:201–208.  https://doi.org/10.318 
    4/095422913X13785717162124 
Dasgupta T, Hossain SA, Meharg AA, Price AH (2004) An arsenate tolerance gene on chromo- 
    some 6 of rice. New Phytol 163:45–49. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1469- 8137.2004.01109.x 
Dixit G, Singh AP, Kumar A et al (2016) Reduced arsenic accumulation in rice (Oryza sativa  
    L.)  shoot  involves  sulfur-mediated  improved  thiol  metabolism,  antioxidant  system  and  
    altered   arsenic   transporters.   Plant   Physiol   Biochem   99:86–96.  https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
    plaphy.2015.11.005 
Dobermann A, Fairhurst T (2000) Rice: nutrient disorders & nutrient management. http://books. 
    irri.org/9810427425_content.pdf 
Duan GL, Hu Y, Liu WJ et al (2011) Evidence for a role of phytochelatins in regulating arse- 
    nic  accumulation  in  rice  grain.  Environ  Exp  Bot  71:416–421.  https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
    envexpbot.2011.02.016 
Duan G, Shao G, Tang Z et al (2017) Genotypic and environmental variations in grain cadmium  
    and arsenic concentrations among a panel of high-yielding rice cultivars. Rice 10:9. https://doi. 
    org/10.1186/s12284- 017- 0149- 2 
Dubey S, Shri M, Misra P et al (2014) Heavy metals induce oxidative stress and genome-wide  
    modulation  in  transcriptome  of  rice  root.  Funct  Integr  Genom  14:401–417.  https://doi. 
    org/10.1007/s10142- 014- 0361- 8 
Duker  AA,  Carranza  EJM,  Hale  M  (2005)  Arsenic  geochemistry  and  health.  Environ  Int  
    31:631–641 
Finnegan PM, Chen W (2012) Arsenic toxicity: the effects on plant metabolism. Front Physiol  
    3:182. https://doi.org/10.3389/fphys.2012.00182 
Flora SJS, Pachauri V, Saxena G (2011) Arsenic, cadmium and lead. In: Reproductive and devel- 
    opmental toxicology. Elsevier, Amsterdam, pp 415–438 
Frei  M,  Becker  K  (2005)  Integrated  rice-fish  culture:  coupled  production  saves  resources.  Nat  
    Resour Forum 29:135–143. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1477- 8947.2005.00122.x 
Gao JP, Chao DY, Lin HX (2007) Understanding abiotic stress tolerance mechanisms: recent stud- 
    ies on stress response in rice. J Integr Plant Biol 49:742–750 
Garai R, Chakraborty AK, Dey SB, Saha KC (1984) Chronic arsenic poisoning from tube-well  
    water. J Indian Med Assoc 82:34–35 
Geng CN, Zhu YG, Liu WJ, Smith SE (2005) Arsenate uptake and translocation in seedlings of  
    two genotypes of rice is affected by external phosphate concentrations. Aquat Bot 83:321–331.  
    https://doi.org/10.1016/j.aquabot.2005.07.003 
Geng A, Wang X, Wu L et al (2017) Arsenic accumulation and speciation in rice grown in arsa- 
    nilic acid-elevated paddy soil. Ecotoxicol Environ Saf 137:172–178. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
    ecoenv.2016.11.030 
Gorny J, Billon G, Lesven L et al (2015) Arsenic behavior in river sediments under redox gradi- 
    ent: a review. Sci Total Environ 505:423–434. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2014.10.011 
GRiSP  (Global  Rice  Science  Partnership)  (2013)  Rice  almanac,  4th  edn.  International  Rice  
    Research Institute, Los Baños. 283 p 
Guha  Mazumder  DN  (2008)  Chronic  arsenic  toxicity  &  human  health.  Indian  J  Med  Res  
    128:436–447 
Guha Mazumder DN (2015) Health effects of chronic arsenic toxicity. In: Handbook of arsenic  
    toxicology. Elsevier, Amsterdam, pp 137–177 
Hayashi S, Kuramata M, Abe T et al (2017) Phytochelatin synthase  OsPCS1 plays a crucial role  
    in reducing arsenic levels in rice grains. Plant J 91:840–848. https://doi.org/10.1111/tpj.13612 
He D, Yang P (2013) Proteomics of rice seed germination. Front Plant Sci 4:246 

----------------------- Page 319-----------------------

308                                                                                  V. Murugaiyan et al. 

Hossain  MF  (2006) Arsenic  contamination  in  Bangladesh:an  overview. Agric  Ecosyst  Environ  
    113:1–16. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.agee.2005.08.034 
Hu P, Huang J, Ouyang Y et al (2013) Water management affects arsenic and cadmium accumula- 
    tion in different rice cultivars. Environ Geochem Health 35:767–778. https://doi.org/10.1007/ 
    s10653- 013- 9533- z 
Huang X, Kurata N, Wei X et al (2012a) A map of rice genome variation reveals the origin of  
    cultivated rice. Nature 490:497–501. https://doi.org/10.1038/nature11532 
Huang Y, Chen Z, Liu W (2012b) Influence of iron plaque and cultivars on antimony uptake by and  
    translocation in rice (Oryza sativa L.) seedlings exposed to Sb(III) or Sb(V). Plant Soil 352:41–49.  

    https://doi.org/10.1007/s11104- 011- 0973- x 
Islam S, Rahman MM, Islam MR, Naidu R (2016) Arsenic accumulation in rice: consequences of  
    rice genotypes and management practices to reduce human health risk. Environ Int 96:139–155.  
    https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envint.2016.09.006 
Järup L (2003) Hazards of heavy metal contamination. Br Med Bull 68:167–182 
Jia Y, Huang H, Zhong M et al (2013) Microbial arsenic methylation in soil and rice rhizosphere.  
    Environ Sci Technol 47:3141–3148. https://doi.org/10.1021/es303649v 
Jian FM, Yamaji N, Mitani N et al (2008) Transporters of arsenite in rice and their role in arsenic  
    accumulation in rice grain. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 105:9931–9935. https://doi.org/10.1073/ 
    pnas.0802361105 
Jiang  JQ, Ashekuzzaman  SM,  Jiang A  et  al  (2013) Arsenic-contaminated  groundwater  and  its  
    treatment  options  in  Bangladesh.  Int  J  Environ  Res  Public  Health  10:18–46.  https://doi. 
    org/10.3390/ijerph10010018 
Jomova  K,  Valko  M  (2011)  Advances  in  metal-induced  oxidative  stress  and  human  disease.  
    Toxicology 283:65–87 
Kalia K, Flora SJS (2005) Strategies for safe and effective therapeutic measures for chronic arsenic  
    and lead poisoning. J Occup Health 47:1–21 
Kamiya T, Islam MR, Duan G et al (2013) Phosphate deficiency signaling pathway is a target of  
    arsenate and phosphate transporter OsPT1 is involved in As accumulation in shoots of rice. Soil  
    Sci Plant Nutr 59:580–590. https://doi.org/10.1080/00380768.2013.804390 
Khush GS (1997) Origin, dispersal, cultivation and variation of rice. Plant Mol Biol 35:25–34 
Kumar M, Puri A (2012) A review of permissible limits of drinking water. Indian J Occup Environ  
    Med 16:40–44. https://doi.org/10.4103/0019- 5278.99696 
Kuramata M, Abe T, Kawasaki A et al (2013) Genetic diversity of arsenic accumulation in rice and  
    QTL analysis of methylated arsenic in rice grains. Rice 6:1–10. https://doi.org/10.1186/193  
    9-8433- 6- 3 
Laha M (2017) Irrigation and groundwater hazards in India. Trans Inst Indian Geogr 39:237–252 
Lawson M, Polya DA, Boyce AJ et al (2016) Tracing organic matter composition and distribution  
    and its role on arsenic release in shallow Cambodian groundwaters. Geochim Cosmochim Acta  
    178:160–177. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.gca.2016.01.010 
Lee JJ, Jang CS, Wang SW et al (2008) Delineation of spatial redox zones using discriminant  
    analysis  and  geochemical  modelling  in  arsenic-affected  alluvial  aquifers.  Hydrol  Process  
    22:3029–3041. https://doi.org/10.1002/hyp.6884 
Lee  CH,  Hsieh YC,  Lin  TH,  Lee  DY  (2013)  Iron  plaque  formation  and  its  effect  on  arsenic  
    uptake by different genotypes of paddy rice. Plant Soil 363:231–241. https://doi.org/10.1007/ 
    s11104- 012- 1308- 2 
Li  Z, Ali  J  (2017)  Breeding  green  super  rice  (GSR)  varieties  for  sustainable  rice  cultivation.  
    In:  Sasaki  T  (ed) Achieving  sustainable  cultivation  of  rice,  vol  1.  Burleigh  Dodds  Science  
    Publishing, Cambridge, pp 109–130 
Li RY, Stroud JL, Ma JF et al (2009) Mitigation of arsenic accumulation in rice with water man- 
    agement and silicon fertilization. Environ Sci Technol 43:3778–3783. https://doi.org/10.1021/ 
    es803643v 
Li G, Sun GX, Williams PN et al (2011) Inorganic arsenic in Chinese food and its cancer risk.  
    Environ Int 37:1219–1225. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envint.2011.05.007 

----------------------- Page 320-----------------------

Arsenic Stress Responses and Accumulation in Rice                                                     309 

Liu J, Cao C, Wong M et al (2010) Variations between rice cultivars in iron and manganese plaque  
    on roots and the relation with plant cadmium uptake. J Environ Sci 22:1067–1072. https://doi. 
    org/10.1016/S1001- 0742(09)60218- 7 
Liu X, Chen S, Chen M et al (2019) Association study reveals genetic loci responsible for arsenic,  
    cadmium and lead accumulation in rice grain in contaminated farmlands. Front Plant Sci 10:61.  
    https://doi.org/10.3389/fpls.2019.00061 
Lomax C, Liu WJ, Wu L et al (2012) Methylated arsenic species in plants originate from soil  
    microorganisms. New Phytol 193:665–672. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1469- 8137.2011.03956.x 
Lou LQ, Ye ZH, Wong MH (2009) A comparison of arsenic tolerance, uptake and accumulation  
    between arsenic hyperaccumulator, Pteris vittata L. and non-accumulator, P. semipinnata L.: a  
    hydroponic study. J Hazard Mater 171:436–442. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jhazmat.2009.06.020 
Ma J, Takahashi E (1990) Effect of silicon on the growth and phosphorus uptake of rice. Plant Soil  
    126:115. https://doi.org/10.1007/BF00041376 
Maclean J, Dawe DC, Hardy B, Hettel G (eds) (2002) Rice almanac, 3rd edn. International Rice  
    Research Institute, Los Baños 
Mandal BK, Suzuki KT (2002) Arsenic round the world: a review. Talanta 58:201–235. https://doi. 
    org/10.1016/S0039- 9140(02)00268- 0 
Mazumder DNG (2003) Chronic arsenic toxicity: clinical features, epidemiology, and treatment:  
    experience in West Bengal. J Environ Sci Health Part A Toxic Hazardous Subst Environ Eng  
    38:141–163. https://doi.org/10.1081/ESE- 120016886 
Meharg AA, Hartley-Whitaker J (2002) Arsenic uptake and metabolism in arsenic- resistant and nonre- 
    sistant plant species. New Phytol 154:29–43. https://doi.org/10.1046/j.1469- 8137.2002.00363.x 
Meharg AA, Rahman M (2003) Arsenic contamination of Bangladesh paddy field soils: implica- 
    tions for rice contribution to arsenic consumption. Environ Sci Technol 37:229–234. https:// 
    doi.org/10.1021/es0259842 
Messerschmidt M, Wagner A, Wong MW, Luger P (2002) Atomic properties of N2O4 based on its  
    experimental charge density. J Am Chem Soc 124:732–733. https://doi.org/10.1021/ja011802c 
Mishra S, Dubey RS (2006) Inhibition of ribonuclease and protease activities in arsenic exposed  
    rice seedlings: role of proline as enzyme protectant. J Plant Physiol 163:927–936. https://doi. 
    org/10.1016/j.jplph.2005.08.003 
Mishra  S,  Jha  AB,  Dubey  RS  (2011)  Arsenite  treatment  induces  oxidative  stress,  upregu- 
    lates  antioxidant  system,  and  causes  phytochelatin  synthesis  in  rice  seedlings.  Protoplasma  
    248:565–577. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00709- 010- 0210- 0 
Mochizuki  H  (2019)  Arsenic  neurotoxicity  in  humans.  Int  J  Mol  Sci  20:3418.  https://doi. 
    org/10.3390/ijms20143418 
Mohan D, Pittman CU (2007) Arsenic removal from water/wastewater using adsorbents: a critical  
    review. J Hazard Mater 142:1–53. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jhazmat.2007.01.006 
Molden D (2013) Water for food, water for life: a comprehensive assessment of water management  
    in agriculture. Routledge, London 
Molina J, Sikora M, Garud N et al (2011) Molecular evidence for a single evolutionary origin  
    of  domesticated  rice.  Proc  Natl  Acad  Sci  U  S  A  108:8351–8356.  https://doi.org/10.1073/ 
    pnas.1104686108 
Mosa KA, Kumar K, Chhikara S et al (2012) Members of rice plasma membrane intrinsic pro- 
    teins subfamily are involved in arsenite permeability and tolerance in plants. Transgenic Res  
    21:1265–1277. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11248- 012- 9600- 8 
Muhammad S, Tahir Shah M, Khan S (2010) Arsenic health risk assessment in drinking water  
    and source apportionment using multivariate statistical techniques in Kohistan region, northern  
    Pakistan. Food Chem Toxicol 48:2855–2864. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fct.2010.07.018 
Mukherjee A,  Kundu  M,  Basu  B  et  al  (2017) Arsenic  load  in  rice  ecosystem  and  its  mitiga- 
    tion   through   deficit   irrigation.   J   Environ   Manag   197:89–95.   https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
    jenvman.2017.03.037 
Murugaiyan V (2019) Genetic mapping of quantitative trait loci associated with arsenic tolerance  
    and accumulation in rice (Oryza sativa L.). Universitäts- und Landesbibliothek, Bonn 

----------------------- Page 321-----------------------

310                                                                                V. Murugaiyan et al. 

Murugaiyan V, Ali J, Mahender A et al (2019) Mapping of genomic regions associated with arse- 
    nic toxicity stress in a backcross-breeding populations of rice (Oryza sativa L.). Rice 12:61.  
    https://doi.org/10.1186/s12284- 019- 0321- y 
Muthayya S, Sugimoto JD, Montgomery S, Maberly GF (2014) An overview of global rice produc- 
    tion, supply, trade, and consumption. Ann N Y Acad Sci 1324:7–14. https://doi.org/10.1111/ 
    nyas.12540 
National Research Council (US) Committee on Medical and Biological Effects of Environmental  
    Pollutants (1977) Distribution of arsenic in the environment. In: Arsenic: medical and biologic  
    effects of environmental pollutants. National Academies Press, Washington, DC, p 3 
Ng JC (2005) Environmental contamination of arsenic and its toxicological impact on humans.  
    Environ Chem 2:146–160 
Nickson RT, Mcarthur JM, Ravenscroft P et al (2000) Mechanism of arsenic release to ground- 
    water,  Bangladesh  and  West  Bengal.  Appl  Geochem  15:403–413.  https://doi.org/10.1016/ 
    S0883- 2927(99)00086- 4 
Nordberg GF, Jin T, Hong F et al (2005) Biomarkers of cadmium and arsenic interactions. Toxicol  
    Appl Pharmacol 206:191–197. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.taap.2004.11.028 
Norton GJ, Deacon CM, Xiong L et al (2010a) Genetic mapping of the rice ionome in leaves and  
    grain: identification of QTLs for 17 elements including arsenic, cadmium, iron and selenium.  
    Plant Soil 329:139–153. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11104- 009- 0141- 8 
Norton GJ, Islam MR, Duan G et al (2010b) Arsenic shoot-grain relationships in field grown rice  
    cultivars. Environ Sci Technol 44:1471–1477. https://doi.org/10.1021/es902992d 
Norton GJ, Pinson SRM, Alexander J et al (2012) Variation in grain arsenic assessed in a diverse  
    panel  of  rice  (Oryza  sativa)  grown  in  multiple  sites.  New  Phytol  193:650–664.  https://doi. 
    org/10.1111/j.1469- 8137.2011.03983.x 
Norton GJ, Douglas A, Lahner B, Yakubova E, Guerinot ML, et al (2014) Genome wide association  
    mapping of grain arsenic, copper, molybdenum and zinc in rice (Oryza sativa L.) grown at four  
    international field sites. PLoS One 9(2): e89685.  https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0089685  
Norton GJ, Travis AJ, Talukdar P et al (2019) Genetic loci-regulating arsenic content in rice grains  
    when grown flooded or under alternative wetting and drying irrigation. Rice 12:54. https://doi. 
    org/10.1186/s12284- 019- 0307- 9 
Nriagu JO, Bhattacharya P, Mukherjee AB et al (2007) Arsenic in soil and groundwater: an over- 
    view. In: Trace metals and other contaminants in the environment. Elsevier, Amsterdam, pp 3–60 
O’Day PA (2006) Chemistry and mineralogy of arsenic. Elements 2:77–83. https://doi.org/10.2113/ 
    gselements.2.2.77 
Pandey S, Rai R, Rai LC (2015) Biochemical and molecular basis of arsenic toxicity and tolerance  
    in microbes and plants. In: Handbook of arsenic toxicology. Elsevier, Amsterdam, pp 627–674 
Pathak H, Tewari A, Sankhyan S et al (2011) Direct-seeded rice: potential, performance and prob- 
    lems: a review. Curr Adv Agric Sci Int 3:77 
Pohl HR, Roney N, Abadin HG (2011) Metal ions affecting the neurological system. Met Ions Life  
    Sci 8:247–262 
Ponomarenko M, Stepanenko I, Kolchanov N (2013) Heat shock proteins. In: Brenner’s encyclo- 
    pedia of genetics, 2nd edn. Elsevier, Amsterdam, pp 402–405 
Rahman MA, Hasegawa H, Rahman MM et al (2007) Arsenic accumulation in rice (Oryza sativa  
    L.) varieties of Bangladesh: a glass house study. Water Air Soil Pollut 185:53–61. https://doi. 
    org/10.1007/s11270- 007- 9425- x 
Rahman  MA,  Hasegawa  H,  Rahman  MM  et  al  (2008)  Straighthead  disease  of  rice  (Oryza  
    sativa L.) induced by arsenic toxicity. Environ Exp Bot 62:54–59.  https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
    envexpbot.2007.07.016 
Rajjou L, Duval M, Gallardo K et al (2012) Seed germination and vigor. Annu Rev Plant Biol  
    63:507–533 
Rao KP, Vani G, Kumar K et al (2011) Arsenic stress activates MAP kinase in rice roots and leaves.  
    Arch Biochem Biophys 506:73–82. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.abb.2010.11.006 
Rao CS, Lal R, Prasad JVNS et al (2015) Potential and challenges of rainfed farming in India. Adv  
    Agron 133:113–181 

----------------------- Page 322-----------------------

Arsenic Stress Responses and Accumulation in Rice                                                    311 

Richards M, Sander BO (2014) Alternate wetting and drying in irrigated rice. J AHIMA. https:// 
    doi.org/10.1016/j.techfore.2006.05.021 
Ronzan M, Piacentini D, Fattorini L et al (2018) Cadmium and arsenic affect root development  
    in Oryza sativa L. negatively interacting with auxin. Environ Exp Bot 151:64–75. https://doi. 
    org/10.1016/j.envexpbot.2018.04.008 
Roy P, Saha A (2002) Metabolism and toxicity of arsenic: a human carcinogen. Curr Sci 82:38–45 
Safiuddin M, Shirazi SM, Yussof S (2011) Arsenic contamination of groundwater in Bangladesh: a  
    review. Int J Phys Sci 6:6791–6800. https://doi.org/10.5897/IJPS11.1300 
Sahoo PK, Mukherjee A (2014) Arsenic fate and transport in the groundwater-soil-plant system: an  
    understanding of suitable rice paddy cultivation in arsenic-enriched areas. In: Recent trends in  
    modelling of environmental contaminants. Springer, New Delhi, pp 21–44 
Sayan B, Kaushik G, Sushanta D et al (2012) Arsenic bioaccumulation in rice and edible plants  
    and subsequent transmission through food chain in Bengal basin: a review of the perspectives  
    for environmental health. Toxicol Environ Chem 94:429 
Seneviratne  M,  Rajakaruna  N,  Rizwan  M  et  al  (2019)  Heavy  metal-induced  oxidative  stress  
    on seed germination and seedling development: a critical review. Environ Geochem Health  
    41:1813–1831. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10653- 017- 0005- 8 
Sengupta M, Bishayi B (2002) Effect of lead and arsenic on murine macrophage response. Drug  
    Chem Toxicol 25:459–472 
Sengupta  MK,  Hossain  MA,  Mukherjee A  et  al  (2006) Arsenic  burden  of  cooked  rice:  tradi- 
    tional  and  modern  methods.  Food  Chem  Toxicol  44:1823–1829.  https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
    fct.2006.06.003 
Seyfferth AL, Webb SM, Andrews JC, Fendorf S (2011) Defining the distribution of arsenic species  
    and plant nutrients in rice (Oryza sativa L.) from the root to the grain. Geochim Cosmochim  
    Acta 75:6655–6671. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.gca.2011.06.029 
Shah AL, Naher UA, Hasan Z et al (2014) Influence of arsenic on rice growth and its mitiga- 
    tion  with  different  water  management  techniques. Asian  J  Crop  Sci  6:373–382.  https://doi. 
    org/10.3923/ajcs.2014.373.382 
Shaibur  MR,  Kitajima  N,  Sugawara  R  et  al  (2006)  Physiological  and  mineralogical  properties  
    of  arsenic-induced  chlorosis  in  rice  seedlings  grown  hydroponically.  Soil  Sci  Plant  Nutr  
    52:691–700. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1747- 0765.2006.00085.x 
Shepherd K, Hubbard D, Fenton N et al (2015) Policy: development goals should enable decision-  
    making. Nature 523:152–154. https://doi.org/10.1038/523152a 
Shi S, Wang T, Chen Z et al (2016)  OsHAC1;1 and OsHAC1;2 function as arsenate reductases  
    and  regulate  arsenic  accumulation.  Plant  Physiol  172:1708–1719.  https://doi.org/10.1104/ 
    pp.16.01332 
Smith  AH,  Lingas  EO,  Rahman  M  (2000)  Contamination  of  drinking-water  by  arsenic  in  
    Bangladesh: a public health emergency. Bull World Health Organ 78:1093–1103. https://doi. 
    org/10.1590/S0042- 96862000000900005 
Song WY, Yamaki T, Yamaji  N  et  al  (2014) A  rice ABC  transporter,  OsABCC1,  reduces  arse- 
    nic  accumulation  in  the  grain.  Proc  Natl  Acad  Sci  U  S  A  111:15699–15704.  https://doi. 
    org/10.1073/pnas.1414968111 
Stanton BA, Caldwell K, Congdon CB et al (2015) MDI Biological Laboratory Arsenic Summit:  
    approaches to limiting human exposure to arsenic. Curr Environ Health Rep 2:329–337. https:// 
    doi.org/10.1007/s40572- 015- 0057- 9 
Sturchio E, Zanellato M, Minoia C, Bemporad E (2013) Arsenic: environmental contamination  
    and exposure. In: Arsenic: sources, environmental impact, toxicity and human health. A medi- 
    cal geology perspective. Nova Publishers, Hauppauge, NY, pp 3–38 
Sultana  F  (2013)  Water,  technology,  and  development:  transformations  of  development  tech- 
    nonatures   in   changing   waterscapes.   Environ   Plan   D   Soc   Sp   31:337–353.   https://doi. 
    org/10.1068/d20010 
Sun  G  (2004)  Arsenic  contamination  and  arsenicosis  in  China.  Toxicol  Appl  Pharmacol  
    198:268–271 

----------------------- Page 323-----------------------

312                                                                                    V. Murugaiyan et al. 

Sun  SK,  Chen Y,  Che  J  et  al  (2018)  Decreasing  arsenic  accumulation  in  rice  by  overexpress- 
    ing OsNIP1;1 and OsNIP3;3 through disrupting arsenite radial transport in roots. New Phytol  
    219:641–653. https://doi.org/10.1111/nph.15190 
Suriyagoda LDB, Dittert K, Lambers H (2018) Mechanism of arsenic uptake, translocation and  
    plant resistance to accumulate arsenic in rice grains. Agric Ecosyst Environ 253:23–37 
Takahashi E (1968) Silica as a nutrient to the rice plant. Jpn Agric Res Q 3:1 
Talukder ASMHM, Meisner CA, Sarkar MAR, Islam MS (2011) Effect of water management,  
    tillage  options  and  phosphorus  status  on  arsenic  uptake  in  rice.  Ecotoxicol  Environ  Saf  
    74:834–839. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ecoenv.2010.11.004 
Tareq SM, Islam SMN, Rahmam MM, Chowdhury DA (2015) Arsenic pollution in groundwater of  
    Southeast Asia: an overview on mobilization process and health effects. Bangladesh J Environ  
    Res 8:47–67 
Thomas DJ (2013) The die is cast: arsenic exposure in early life and disease susceptibility. Chem  
    Res Toxicol 26:1778–1781 
Tripathi P, Tripathi RD, Singh RP et al (2013) Arsenite tolerance in rice (Oryza sativa L.) involves  
    coordinated  role  of  metabolic  pathways  of  thiols  and  amino  acids.  Environ  Sci  Pollut  Res  
    20:884–896. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11356- 012- 1205- 5 
Tuli R, Chakrabarty D, Trivedi PK, Tripathi RD (2010) Recent advances in arsenic accumulation  
    and metabolism in rice. Mol Breed 26:307–323. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11032- 010- 9412- 6 
Vahidnia A, Van Der Voet GB, De Wolff FA (2007) Arsenic neurotoxicity: a review. Hum Exp  
    Toxicol 26:823–832 
Vahter M, Concha G (2001) Role of metabolism in arsenic toxicity. Pharmacol Toxicol 89:1–5.  
    https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1600- 0773.2001.890101.x 
Vaughan DJ (2006) Arsenic. Elements 2:71–75. https://doi.org/10.2113/gselements.2.2.71 
Wang P, Zhang W, Mao C et al (2016) The role of  OsPT8 in arsenate uptake and varietal differ- 
    ence in arsenate tolerance in rice. J Exp Bot 67:6051–6059. https://doi.org/10.1093/jxb/erw362 
Wang FZ, Chen MX, Yu LJ et al (2017) OsARM 1, an R2R3 MYB transcription factor, is involved  
    in  regulation  of  the  response  to  arsenic  stress  in  rice.  Front  Plant  Sci  8:1868.  https://doi. 
    org/10.3389/fpls.2017.01868 
Wenzel WW, Alloway BJ (2013) Chapter 9 Arsenic. Springer, Dordrecht 
Wu C, Ye Z, Li H et al (2012) Do radial oxygen loss and external aeration affect iron plaque for- 
    mation and arsenic accumulation and speciation in rice? J Exp Bot 63:2961–2970. https://doi. 
    org/10.1093/jxb/ers017 
Wu LB, Shhadi MY, Gregorio G et al (2014) Genetic and physiological analysis of tolerance to  
    acute iron toxicity in rice. Rice 7:8. https://doi.org/10.1186/s12284- 014- 0008- 3 
Wu X, Cobbina SJ, Mao G et al (2016) A review of toxicity and mechanisms of individual and  
    mixtures of heavy metals in the environment. Environ Sci Pollut Res 23:8244–8259. https:// 
    doi.org/10.1007/s11356- 016- 6333- x 
Wu LB, Ueda Y, Lai SK, Frei M (2017) Shoot tolerance mechanisms to iron toxicity in rice (Oryza  
    sativa L.). Plant Cell Environ 40:570–584. https://doi.org/10.1111/pce.12733 
Xu J, Shi S, Wang L et al (2017)  OsHAC4 is critical for arsenate tolerance and regulates arsenic  
    accumulation in rice. New Phytol 215:1090–1101. https://doi.org/10.1111/nph.14572 
Yamazaki S, Ueda Y, Mukai A et al (2018) Rice phytochelatin synthases  OsPCS1 and OsPCS2  
    make different contributions to cadmium and arsenic tolerance. Plant Direct 2:e00034. https:// 
    doi.org/10.1002/pld3.34 
Yang Y, Zhang A, Chen Y et al (2018) Impacts of silicon addition on arsenic fractionation in soils  
    and arsenic speciation in Panax notoginseng planted in soils contaminated with high levels  
    of arsenic. Ecotoxicol Environ Saf 162:400–407. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ecoenv.2018.07.015 
Yang Y, Hu H, Fu Q et al (2020) Phosphorus regulates As uptake by rice via releasing As into  
    soil porewater and sequestrating it on Fe plaque. Sci Total Environ 738:139869. https://doi. 
    org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2020.139869 

----------------------- Page 324-----------------------

Arsenic Stress Responses and Accumulation in Rice                                                313 

Yu S, Ali J, Zhang C et al (2020) Genomic breeding of green super rice varieties and their deploy- 
    ment in Asia and Africa. Theor Appl Genet 133:1427–1442 
Zavala YJ, Duxbury JM (2008) Arsenic in rice: I. Estimating normal levels of total arsenic in rice  
    grain. Environ Sci Technol 42:3856–3860. https://doi.org/10.1021/es702747y 
Zhang  J,  Zhu  YG,  Zeng  DL  et  al  (2008)  Mapping  quantitative  trait  loci  associated  with  
    arsenic  accumulation    in  rice  (Oryza   sativa).  New   Phytol   177:350–356.    https://doi. 
    org/10.1111/j.1469- 8137.2007.02267.x 
Zhao FJ, Ma JF, Meharg AA, McGrath SP (2009) Arsenic uptake and metabolism in plants. New  
    Phytol 181:777–794. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1469- 8137.2008.02716.x 
Zhao FJ, Ago Y, Mitani N et al (2010a) The role of the rice aquaporin Lsi 1 in arsenite efflux from  
    roots. New Phytol 186:392–399. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1469- 8137.2010.03192.x 
Zhao FJ, McGrath SP, Meharg AA (2010b) Arsenic as a food chain contaminant: mechanisms  
    of plant uptake and metabolism and mitigation strategies. Annu Rev Plant Biol 61:535–559.  
    https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev- arplant- 042809- 112152 
Zhao FJ, Stroud JL, Khan AA, McGrath SP (2012) Arsenic translocation in rice investigated using  
    radioactive 73As tracer. Plant Soil 350:413–420. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11104- 011- 0926- 4 
Zhao FJ, Zhu YG, Meharg AA (2013) Methylated arsenic species in rice: geographical variation,  
    origin, and uptake mechanisms. Environ Sci Technol 47:3957–3966. https://doi.org/10.1021/ 
    es304295n 
Zhu YG, Williams PN, Meharg AA (2008) Exposure to inorganic arsenic from rice: a global health  
    issue? Environ Pollut 154:169–171. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envpol.2008.03.015 

Open Access    This chapter is licensed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution 4.0  
International License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/), which permits use, sharing,  
adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give appropriate  
credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons license and  
indicate if changes were made. 
    The images or other third party material in this chapter are included in the chapter's Creative  
Commons license, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not  
included in the chapter's Creative Commons license and your intended use is not permitted by  
statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from  
the copyright holder. 

----------------------- Page 325-----------------------

Molecular Approaches for Disease  
Resistance in Rice 

Mohammed Jamaloddin, Anumalla Mahender, C. Guru Gokulan,  
Chintavaram Balachiranjeevi, A. Maliha, Hitendra Kumar Patel,  
and Jauhar Ali 

Abstract  Rice  production  needs  to  be  sustained  in  the  coming  decades,  with  
changing climatic conditions becoming more conducive to the prevalence of disease  
outbreaks. Major rice diseases collectively cause enormous economic damage and  
yield instability. Breeding for disease-resistant rice varieties could be one of the best  
options to counter these disease outbreaks. Disease-screening protocols and newer  
technologies are essential for effective phenotyping and would aid in gene discov- 
ery and function. Understanding the genetics of disease mechanisms and stacking  
of broad-spectrum disease-resistance genes could lead to faster development of rice  
varieties with multiple disease resistance. New molecular breeding approaches are  
discussed for the development of these varieties. The molecular biology of disease  
resistance is now better understood and could be well manipulated for improved  
resilience.  Transgenic  approaches  for  disease  resistance  are  discussed.  Genome-  
editing tools for the development of disease-resistant rice varieties are thoroughly  
discussed. The use of bioinformatics tools to speed up the process and to obtain a  
better  understanding  of  molecular  genetics  mechanisms  of  disease  resistance  is  
explained. 

Keywords  Rice · Biotic diseases · Phenotypic screening · QTLs and genes ·  
Breeding strategies · Genome editing 

M. Jamaloddin · C. G. Gokulan · A. Maliha · H. K. Patel  
Centre for Cellular and Molecular Biology (CCMB), Hyderabad, India  

A. Mahender · C. Balachiranjeevi  
Rice Breeding Platform, International Rice Research Institute (IRRI),   
Los Baños, Laguna, Philippines  

J. Ali (*)  
Hybrid Rice Breeding Cluster, Hybrid Rice Development Consortium (HRDC), Rice  
Breeding Platform, International Rice Research Institute (IRRI),   
Los Baños, Laguna, Philippines 
e-mail: J.Ali@irri.org 

© The Author(s) 2021                                                                           315 
J. Ali, S. H. Wani (eds.), Rice Improvement,  
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-66530-2_10 

----------------------- Page 326-----------------------

316                                                                     M. Jamaloddin et al. 

1     Introduction 

Rice (Oryza sativa L.) is a staple and the most crucial food security crop in the  
world. It plays a vital role in the human diet and feeds more than 50% of the world’s  
population (Rathna Priya et al. 2019). By 2050, global demand for rice is projected  
to rise more than 40% to feed the rapidly growing world population (Milovanovic  
and Smutka 2017). Despite impressive global increases in production from 289 mil- 
lion tons in 1968 to 782 million tons in 2018, this quantum jump still has to keep  
pace with demand for rice from the rising population (FAOSTAT 2020). At present,  
rice cultivation throughout South Asia and in ASEAN countries is facing significant  
threats because of a few major biotic stresses (Yugander et al. 2017). Approximately  
52% of the global productivity of rice grain yield is severely damaged by biotic fac- 
tors, of which nearly 31% is due to various diseases such as bacterial blight (caused  
by  Xanthomonas  oryzae),  blast  (caused  by  Magnaporthe  grisea),  sheath  blight  
(caused by Rhizoctonia solani), and tungro disease (tungro bacilliform virus and  
tungro spherical virus) (Park et al. 2008). Detailed information about the symptoms  
caused by these major diseases, along with the favorable conditions required by  
these pathogens and yield losses incurred, is presented in Table  1. The severity of  
biotic stresses in rice production is increasing at a startling pace of late because of  
rapid changes in climate (Jamaloddin et al. 2020). Changing climatic conditions are  
contributing to the emergence of new virulent races and the occurrence of diseases  
in new localities. Many diseases considered as minor thus far have become eco- 
nomically  significant  in  many  rice-cultivating  areas  and  are  exacerbating  their  
impact  (Anderson  et  al.  2004). According  to  Zhang  et  al.  (2009),  rice  crops  are  
affected by around 70 pathogens, especially viruses, bacteria, fungi, and nematodes.  
Estimated yield loss because of pathogens globally and as per hotspot range for rice  
is 30% (24.6–40.9%) (Savary et al. 2019). Over the past 150 years, many rice dis- 
eases have caused outbreaks and spread rapidly in different parts of the world. Rice  
diseases were observed for the first time in different locations, such as bacterial  
blight and sheath blight in Japan during 1884–1885 and 1910, respectively; false  
smut in the United States during 1906; blast in Africa during 1922; rice tungro in the  
Philippines during 1940; rice brown spot in India during 1942; bacterial leaf streak  
in India during 1963; and rice yellow mottle disease in Kenya during 1966. These  
diseases, along with a few newly emerging epidemics, are becoming a significant  
threat to rice production. 
   Despite  so  many  alternatives  for  crop  protection,  plant  pathogens  still  pose  a  
challenge  to  agriculture.  Several  management  practices  have  been  adopted  to  
decrease their impact, such as chemical control, biological control, optimum fertil- 
izer application, appropriate planting dates, and disease forecasting. However, not  
all of these methods are environment-friendly and alone are not enough to control  
the diseases completely. The present situation thus requires environment-friendly  
and cost-effective modern technologies such as the development and cultivation of  
disease-resistant cultivars. The development of these varieties using only conven- 
tional breeding methods consumes a lot of time, land, and labor. In this context,  

----------------------- Page 327-----------------------

Molecular Approaches for Disease Resistance in Rice                                                  317 

Table 1   Key features of major diseases in rice 

                                                       Favorable  
 Disease     Pathogen           Symptoms               conditions              Yield loss   Reference 
 Blast       Caused by the      Early-stage            Prolonged period        70–80%       Jamaloddin  
             fungus             symptoms appear        free from moisture.                  et al.  
             Magnaporthe        as white to            High humidity                        (2020) 
             oryzae (Mo)        gray-green lesions     conditions. Gentle  
                                with dark green        or no wind at night.  
                                specks. These soon     Night temperatures  
                                enlarge and            from 17 to  
                                spindle-shaped         22 °C. High rate of  
                                lesions appear with    fertilizer. 
                                a gray center and  
                                dark brown margin. 
 Bacterial   Caused by          Normally, disease      Suitable                Up to 50%    Liu et al.  
 blight      bacterium          appears at heading     temperature is                       (2014) 
 (BB)        Xanthomonas        stage, but can occur   25–30 °C. High  
             oryzae pv.         early in severe        humidity (above  
             oryzae (Xoo)       conditions. Infected   70%), rain, and  
                                plants’ young          deep water. Severe  
                                leaves change from     winds, which cause  
                                pale green to          wounds. High rate  
                                gray-green and roll    of fertilizer. 
                                up. As the disease  
                                progresses, the  
                                entire leaf may  
                                eventually be  
                                affected, becoming  
                                whitish or grayish  
                                and then dying. 
 Bacterial   Caused by          Plants can be          There is a higher       8–32%        Liu et al.  
 leaf        bacterium          affected from          probability of                       (2014) 
 streak      Xanthomonas        maximum tillering      developing it in  
 (BLS)       oryzae pv.         to panicle             areas having weeds  
             oryzicola (Xoc)    initiation.            and stubbles  
                                Symptoms appear        harboring infection.  
                                on leaf blades as      Temperatures from  
                                narrow, dark           25 to 34 °C with  
                                greenish water-        relative humidity  
                                soaked interveinal     >70% are more  
                                streaks of various     congenial. 
                                lengths. Later,  
                                these streaks  
                                become light  
                                brown to yellowish  
                                gray. 

                                                                                            (continued) 

----------------------- Page 328-----------------------

318                                                                                       M. Jamaloddin et al. 

Table 1   (continued) 

                                                            Favorable  
 Disease      Pathogen             Symptoms                 conditions                Yield loss    Reference 
 Tungro       Caused by Rice       Infection can occur      Viruses are              Up to          Bunawan  
              tungro               during all growth        transmitted by            100%          et al.  
              bacilliform          stages but mostly        leafhoppers that                        (2014) 
              virus (RTBV)         during the               feed on tungro-  
              and rice tungro      vegetative phase.        infected plants.  
              spherical virus      The tillering stage      Leafhoppers are  
              (RTSV)               is the most              capable of  
                                   vulnerable. Leaves       transmitting viruses  
                                   of infected plants       to other plants  
                                   become yellow or         within 5–7 days. 
                                   orange-yellow and  
                                   may also have  
                                   rust-colored spots.  
                                   Most of the  
                                   panicles are  
                                   entirely or partially  
                                   sterile with ill-filled  
                                   grains. 
 False        Caused by the        False smut can           The disease can           In severe     Huang  
 smut         fungus               infect individual        occur in areas with       cases,        et al.  
              Villosiclava         rice grains. Only a      high relative            tillers will   (2019) 
              virens               few panicle grains       humidity (>90%)          be affected  
              (anamorph:           are usually              and temperature           85–100%. 
              Ustilaginoidea       infected, and the        ranging from 25 to  
              virens)              remaining grains         35 °C. Rain and  
                                   are normal. A smut       soils with high  
                                   ball appears at first    nitrogen content  
                                   and grows                also favor false  
                                   gradually up to          smut. Wind can  
                                   1 cm. As fungi           spread the fungal  
                                   growth intensifies,      spores from plant to  
                                   the smut balls burst     plant. 
                                   and become orange  
                                   and then later  
                                   yellowish green/ 
                                   greenish black in  
                                   color. 

                                                                                                     (continued) 

----------------------- Page 329-----------------------

Molecular Approaches for Disease Resistance in Rice                                                           319 

Table 1   (continued) 

                                                            Favorable  
 Disease      Pathogen             Symptoms                 conditions               Yield loss     Reference 
 Sheath       Caused by the        The fungus attacks       Temperature from         20–60%         Molla et al.  
 blight       fungus               the plants from          28 to 32 °C, high                       (2020) 
              Rhizoctonia          tillering to heading     rates of N fertilizer,  
              solani               stage. Initial           high seed rate or  
                                   symptoms appear          low spacing, dense  
                                   on leaf sheaths near   canopy, inoculum in  
                                   the water line in the   soil or floating on  
                                   form of oval or          the water, and  
                                   irregular greenish       continuous  
                                   gray lesions. Later,     cultivation of  
                                   lesions extend to        high-yielding  
                                   the upper parts of       varieties favor  
                                   the plants and           disease  
                                   rapidly coalesce,        development. The  
                                   covering entire          crop is more  
                                   tillers from the         vulnerable during  
                                   water line to the        the rainy season. 
                                   flag leaf. 
 Sheath       Caused by            The sheath rot           More prevalent           20–85%         Peeters  
 rot          fungus               lesion starts at the     during wet seasons                      et al.  
              Sarocladium          uppermost leaf           than dry seasons.                       (2020) 
              oryzae               sheath consisting of   High relative  
                                   young panicles           humidity and  
                                   within. Early            temperatures from  
                                   symptoms are             20 to 28 °C from  
                                   oblong to irregular      heading to crop  
                                   lesions on the           maturity. High rates  
                                   leaves with dark         of N fertilizer  
                                   reddish brown            application. Plant  
                                   margins and              injuries and wounds  
                                   brownish gray            caused by insects  
                                   throughout. The          such as stem borers  
                                   disease can cause        at the panicle  
                                   partial emergence        initiation stage. 
                                   of panicles present  
                                   in the infected  
                                   sheaths. The  
                                   unmerged panicles  
                                   rot and turn dark  
                                   brown with a  
                                   whitish powdery  
                                   growth inside the  
                                   sheaths. Infected  
                                   panicles and grains  
                                   look sterile,  
                                   ill-filled, shriveled,  
                                   and discolored. 

----------------------- Page 330-----------------------

320                                                                       M. Jamaloddin et al. 

molecular markers come to the rescue of plant breeders by helping them decrease  
the  time  between  breeding  and  achieving  the  desired  product.  The  discovery  of  
DNA markers led to a new tool in plant breeding called marker-assisted selection  
(MAS), which is one of the widely used components of a discipline called molecu- 
lar  breeding.  The  application  of  DNA  markers  to  plant  breeding  significantly  
increased its efficiency and precision. MAS is now one of the most advanced meth- 
odologies on hand for the transfer of one or more desired genes/genomic regions  
into elite rice varieties in more durable combinations. Deploying a single R-gene  
often leads to resistance breakdown in a short period as the pathogen evolves and  
makes itself resistant to the action of the gene. Therefore, pyramiding of multiple  
R-genes imparting resistance against different races of a pathogen through MAS is  
an efficient way to attain long-term and broad-spectrum resistance. Although this is  
an advanced method, it has some disadvantages. The main drawback of this approach  
is that one parent, or even both parents, used in the breeding program may carry  
quantitative trait loci (QTL) alleles that are either similar or exact to the ones pres- 
ent in the elite germplasm accessions used in other breeding programs. In such a  
situation,  the  QTL  being  introgressed  may  contribute  only  partially  to  the  trait  
improvement. In other cases, the impact of a QTL may differ based on the genetic  
background as a result of interactions with other loci or epistasis (Holland  2001).  
Moreover,  there  are  many  more  important  traits  for  which  no  genes  have  been  
reported so far. In such situations in which a gene is not available in the gene pool,  
researchers are forced to look outside the gene pool toward other genera or some- 
times toward another kingdom to find the desired gene. 
    Genetic modification (GM) technology has been developed to make changes to  
an organism’s genes to give it new traits that would not occur in nature or to elimi- 
nate undesirable characteristics. GM technology using recombinant DNA technol- 
ogy  is  useful  for  developing  disease-resistant  varieties  but  still  has  not  reached  
farmers because of a lack of public acceptance and political issues in many coun- 
tries. Under these situations, researchers are left with an option to create mutations  
in the gene pool with an expectation to generate variation for a trait not naturally  
present in the gene pool. 
   Mutation breeding is helpful in creating novel mutants with genetic variations  
for plant breeding and functional genomics. It could be used for rice crop improve- 
ment programs. Mutation induction can be of advantage to produce cultivars with  
desired  characteristics  within  defined  germplasm  pools.  Normally,  gamma-rays  
(γ-rays) and ethyl methane sulfonate (EMS) have been used extensively to develop  
rice mutants. In rice, there have been reports of some important mutant collections  
developed to carry out functional studies and Hirochika et al. (2004) made available  
a list of the mutant libraries. Madamba et al. (2009) found a gamma-ray-induced  
IR64 mutant, G978, that gave enhanced resistance to blast and bacterial blight. The  
resistance was found to be quantitative and nonrace-specific against bacterial and  
fungal  pathogens. The  mutation  was  shown  to  be  inherited  as  a  single  recessive  
gene, Bsdr 1, and it caused a shorter stature relative to IR64 and was mapped as a  
QTL to a 3.8-Mb region on chromosome 12. Comparison of the gene expression  
profiles of the mutant and wild type showed the candidate gene to encode a U-box  

----------------------- Page 331-----------------------

Molecular Approaches for Disease Resistance in Rice                                                  321 

domain-containing protein. The disrupted gene exhibited a loss of expression in the  
mutant and cosegregated with the mutant phenotype (Madamba et al. 2009). These  
techniques of causing mutations have a problem of creating more undesirable than  
desirable phenotypes. In other words, these techniques result in random mutations  
in the genome. The frequency of variations can be controlled but not in the genomic  
region where they are desired to occur. To achieve a desirable outcome from these  
experiments, a large population of mutants has to be screened, and this requires a lot  
of time, space, and resources. 
    Ultimately, the new era of genome engineering technologies offers vast potential  
for crop improvement as they allow site-specific modifications of DNA sequences  
to  be  executed  under  laboratory  conditions.  The  accessibility  to  vast  genomic  
resources and an easy-to-handle genome size make rice more amenable for GM  
technologies.  Advances  in  genomics  and  the  development  of  various  genome-  
editing technologies using engineered site-specific nucleases (SSNs) have made the  
application  of  genome  engineering  to  crops  easy.  Among  various  SSNs,  the  
CRISPR/Cas9 system is commonly applied because of its simplicity, robustness,  
and high efficiency (Wang et al. 2018). In comparison with other genome-editing  
tools such as zinc-finger nucleases and transcription activator-like effector nucle- 
ases (TALENs), this technique is versatile and simple (Ma et al. 2015b). This tech- 
nology has been applied to agricultural crop plants with the aim of crop improvement.  
Oliva et al. (2019) used the CRISPR-Cas9 system to introduce mutations in three  
SWEET  gene  promoters  to  make  robust  and  broad-spectrum  bacterial  blight-  
resistant lines. There is still much scope for its use and application. 
    In the future, the challenge for scientists is not only to develop rice varieties for  
specific diseases but also to select for horizontal resistance without altering other  
desirable traits of elite rice varieties. A systematically designed experiment involv- 
ing highly efficient molecular tools would make it possible to achieve this outcome.  
Hence,  the  current  chapter  amalgamates  details  on  the  present  status  of  the  key  
diseases that affect rice production, various molecular strategies for attaining dis- 
ease resistance, and prospects of molecular breeding for disease resistance in rice. 

2      Phenotypic Screening Techniques for Major Diseases  
      of Rice: Pathogen Inoculum, Plant Infection Assays,  
      and Disease Scoring 

2.1      Bacterial Blight  

Bacterial blight (BB), caused by Xanthomonas oryzae pv. oryzae (Xoo), targets the  
seedling  stage  of  rice,  resulting  in  leaves  turning  grayish  green  and  rolling  up.  
Usually, BB inoculation can be done in two ways, either in the field or in the green- 
house. Many techniques are available to infect the plant with inoculum such as clip- 
ping,  needle  prick,  paint-brush,  and  spray  methods.  But  the  most  preferable,  

----------------------- Page 332-----------------------

322                                                                                  M. Jamaloddin et al. 

efficient, and feasible for inoculation is the clipping method (Jabeen et al. 2011).  
Individually,   collected   Xoo   strains   are   multiplied   and   stored   on   modified  
Wakimoto’sagar (Sundaram et al. 2009) and the selected rice plants at 45-days-old  
stage are clip-inoculated with a freshly prepared bacterial suspension (~108–9 cfu/ 

mL) by the following method given by Kauffman et al. ( 1973). In this method, 1–2-  
cm tips of five leaves are clipped with scissors, after they were already dipped in  
bacterial suspension culture, and disease score is recorded 2 weeks post-inoculation  
both by visual scoring and by measuring the lesion length (LL) as per the Standard  
Evaluation System (SES) scale of the International Rice Research Institute (IRRI  
1996) (0–3 = resistant, 3–5 = moderately resistant (MR), 5–7 = moderately suscep- 
tible (MS), and 7–9 = susceptible). 

2.2      Blast Disease  

The  causal  organism  for  blast  disease  is  a  fungus,  Magnaporthe  oryzae  (Mo).  
Symptoms of blast can appear during any developmental stage and on all parts of  
the rice plant, including leaves, leaf collars, necks, panicles, pedicels, and seeds.  
Standard screening protocols of rice varieties for susceptibility to rice blast are usu- 
ally carried out by spraying the plant with conidial suspensions under greenhouse  
and field conditions using local isolates of the pathogen (Takahashi et al.  2009).  
However, for screening against exotic strains, quarantine restrictions are frequently  
applied to control any escape of the pathogen into the surrounding environment (Jia  
et al. 2003). In field conditions, artificial leaf blast disease screening usually takes  
place in a Uniform Blast Nursery (UBN) (Jamaloddin et al.  2020). Applying an  
excess  rate  of  nitrogen  fertilizer  (150  kg  N/ha)  makes  rice  more  vulnerable  to  
spreading blast infection. Artificial inoculation is done with a highly virulent blast  
                                                                              5 
race (fungal conidial suspension at a concentration of 1 × 10  spores/mL) by spray- 
ing on UBN beds 25–30 days after sowing (DAS). Later, the beds are covered with  
polythene sheets during the night to create humid conditions for disease develop- 
ment. The disease score is collected 10–15 days after infection, depending on the  
severity of the infection on the susceptible check using the SES (IRRI  1996). In  
in vitro conditions, spot inoculation and filter paper inoculation methods are used  
for inoculation at the vegetative and reproductive stages of rice plants (Jia et al.  
2003; Takahashi et al. 2009). 

2.3       Sheath Blight 

Sheath blight (ShB) disease is caused by a fungus, Rhizoctonia solani. The fungus  
attacks the rice plant from tillering to heading stage. The early symptoms of sheath  
blight  involve  oval  circles  on  leaves  just  above  the  waterline. Various  screening  
methods have been developed to screen for ShB in greenhouse and field conditions.  

----------------------- Page 333-----------------------

Molecular Approaches for Disease Resistance in Rice                                               323 

Eizenga et al. (2002) delineated a growth-chamber screening technique for sheath  
blight on Oryza spp. Later, Jia et al. (2003) developed the detached-leaf method. For  
screening ShB under greenhouse conditions, three inoculation methods have been  
described: liquid-cultured mycelia ball, mycelia suspension, and agar block. Out of  
these, the liquid culture mycelia ball is a more efficient and better method for suc- 
cessful inoculation (Park et al. 2008). Field screening at the reproductive stage is the  
most  commonly  used  method.  But  field  trials  require  a  lot  of  labor  and  a  large  
amount  of  seed  material,  inoculum,  and  high-humidity  conditions  for  up  to  
3–5 months to complete the evaluations (Jia et al. 2007). Normally, screening of  
selected material for ShB tolerance/susceptibility is done using a highly virulent  
isolate of Rhizoctonia solani. Initially, ShB isolate is maintained on a potato dex- 
trose agar (PDA, extract from 200 g/L of potato, 20 g/L of dextrose, and 20 g/L of  
agar) plate and incubated at 28 °C in darkness. For plant inoculations, Typha stem  
pieces (3–4 cm) are cut and autoclaved in plastic covers. This sterile Typha is inocu- 
lated with a 5-mm mycelial plug of R. solani from a 3-day-old PDA plate and incu- 
bated in the dark for 10 days at 28 °C. The colonized Typha pieces will be used for  
inoculating the rice plants at a rate of three to four pieces per hill. 
    Disease phenotype will be scored 2 weeks after inoculation by measuring the  
relative lesion height (RLH) as per the following formula: 

                      RLH (%) = (Lesion length / Plant height ) ´ 100 
                                                                                   

    The IRRI ( 1996) phenotype scale is used to classify the plants based on their  
disease severity index from 0 to 9. 

2.4      Sheath Rot of Rice 

Sheath rot (ShR) is a symptom that is observed in rice plants when infected by any  
of the following pathogens: Sarocladium oryzae, Fusarium sp., Pseudomonas sp.,  
and  Cochliobolus  lunatus.  Other  pathogens  have  been  reported  to  cause  similar  
symptoms in rice (Bigirimana et al. 2015). Multiple screening techniques that are  
being used for sheath rot disease resistance in rice include the mealybug inoculation  
method, rice grain/hull inoculum, leaf piece inoculum, cotton swabbing of conidial  
spores, spraying or injecting conidial suspension on the sheath, and detached til- 
ler–based assays (Mahadevaiah et al.  2015; Samiyappan et al. 2003). The estab- 
lished screening methods differ depending on the causal agent of ShR as well as the  
growth stage of the plant. The pathogen is cultured on PDA plates for up to 14 days  
at 28 °C (Panda and Mishra 2019). A study by Mahadevaiah et al. (2015) compared  
multiple inoculation methods for Sarocladium oryzae during different growth stages  
and observed that seed inoculation is a suitable screening method for screening for  
disease resistance in young plants or early infection. In this method, the seeds are  
                                                      5 
soaked overnight in conidial suspension (10  spores/mL) and then germinated. The  
number of germinated plants and lesion lengths 14 days after inoculation are scored.  

----------------------- Page 334-----------------------

324                                                                                 M. Jamaloddin et al. 

For screening plants in peak vegetative to booting stage, foliar inoculation methods  
were able to provide reliable and conclusive results 15 days after infection. For a  
faster in vitro screening, the detached-tiller assay is recommended, in which the til- 
lers are cut and placed on moist paper and inoculated with mycelial mats. Visible  
lesions are observed as early as 3 days postinoculation (Samiyappan et al.  2003;  
Mahadevaiah et al. 2017). Disease severity is estimated by measuring the area of the  
sheath and/or leaf affected (Mahadevaiah et al. 2017). Pseudomonas fuscovaginae  
also causes ShR in rice (Bigirimana et al. 2015). Adorada et al. (2013) reported and  
recommended multiple screening techniques for screening ShR caused by P. fusco- 
vaginae. The bacteria are cultured using King’s medium B initially for about 24 h.  
For plant inoculations, the following methods were found to be effective: (1) pin-  
                                                                                                    7 
pricking the upper leaf sheath using a needle dipped in bacterial suspension (10  cfu/ 
mL) and measuring disease severity 14 days postinoculation in plants at the booting  
stage; (2) spraying the inoculum was found effective and is recommended for mass  
screening for ShR resistance in plants at the booting stage; (3) for early-stage resis- 
tance,  soaking  seeds  in  bacterial  inoculum  before  germination  is  recommended,  
followed  by  measuring  the  decrease  in  seedling  height  10  days  later  (Adorada  
et al. 2013). 

2.5      False Smut  

The fungus  Ustilaginoidea virens causes false smut of rice. This fungus attacks the  
developing  panicles  and  leads  to  the  formation  of  smutted  balls  (cottony  flakes  
around the grains). The fungus is generally cultured on potato sucrose agar plates or  
potato  sucrose  broth  for  mass  production  of  conidial  suspension  (Panguluri  and  
Kumar 2013). Screening for false smut is done during the booting stage of the plants  
                                                                                          4 
through the following methods. Spraying conidial suspension (5 × 10  spores/mL)  
at the booting stage is one of the recommended ways for screening for false smut  
(Kaur and Singh 2017). Another method involves injecting the conidial suspension  
into the boot (Panguluri and Kumar  2013; Kaur 2014). It has been observed that  
spraying  spores  has  produced  a  higher  disease  incidence  and  this  is  suitable  for  
screening for resistant varieties (Kaur 2014). Disease severity is scored by calculat- 
ing the percentages of infected tillers and infected grains per panicle and a score is  
assigned as recommended by Rice SES (IRRI 2013; Chaudhari et al. 2019). 

2.6       Tungro Disease of Rice 

Rice tungro is caused by two viruses, RTBV (rice tungro bacilliform virus) and  
RTSV (rice tungro spherical virus), and is transmitted by green leafhopper (GLH:  
Nephotettix  virescens  (Dist.)).  The  viral  infection  is  manifested  by  the  stunted  
growth of rice plants and yellowing of leaves (Anjaneyulu et al. 1982; Panguluri and  

----------------------- Page 335-----------------------

Molecular Approaches for Disease Resistance in Rice                                                        325 

Kumar 2013). Nursery screening for tungro resistance in rice is carried out by let- 
ting three to five viruliferous GLH per plant (20–30 days old) feed in a closed envi- 
ronment and scoring the disease symptoms 14 days later as recommended by Rice  
SES (Anjaneyulu et al. 1982; Sebastian et al. 1996). 

2.7      Bacterial Leaf Streak  

Bacterial leaf streak (BLS) of rice is caused by the bacterium Xanthomonas oryzae  
pv. oryzicola (Xoc). BLS is manifested as water-soaked lesions on the leaf surface,  
which can result in decreased photosynthesis and hence diminished yield (He et al.  
2012). Screening for BLS resistance is mainly performed using either of two meth- 
ods. For screening seedlings, bacteria are initially grown in peptone sucrose broth,  
                                                  8         9 
and  a  bacterial  suspension  from  10   to  10   cfu/mL  is  used  for  infiltrating  the  
expanded  leaves  using  a  needleless  syringe.  The  disease  symptoms  are  scored  
14  days  postinoculation  (Ju  et  al. 2017).  For  field  screening  or  screening  older  
plants, matured leaves are pin-pricked with needles that are dipped in bacterial inoc- 
ulum on either side of the leaves. The lesions caused are measured 20 days postin- 
oculation (Tang et al. 2000; Chen et al. 2006a, b; He et al. 2012). Disease severity  
is scored as per Rice SES. 

3      Genetics of Disease Resistance 

Deployment  of  genes  conferring  host-plant  resistance  provides  an  economical,  
durable, effective, and environmentally safe approach to combat plant diseases and  
decrease  yield  losses  (Fig.  1).  Major  resistance  genes  from  different  resistance  
donors have been reported for various rice diseases. So far, more than 44 resistance  
genes have been identified against bacterial blight (Kim and Reinke 2019). More than  
100 distinctive blast-resistance genes have been reported on different rice chromosomes  
and, out of these, 21 genes have been cloned (Devi et al. 2020). Two major sheath  
blight QTLs (qShB9-2 and qSBR11-1) have been reported (Channamallikarjuna et al.  
2010). But, thus far, genetic diversity for high resistance to/tolerance of ShB has not  
been reported in either cultivated rice or its wild relatives; thus, cloning of genes for  
ShB resistance is straggling (Bonman  1992). For bacterial leaf streak (BLS), no  
major resistance genes (R-genes) have been identified and only a few QTLs have  
been mapped. Out of these, qXO-2-1, qXO-4-1, and qXO-11-2 were showing resis- 
tance to more than nine Xoc and Xoo strains (Bossa-Castro et al. 2018). In the case  
of tungro disease, a resistance QTL was found in Indian landrace ARC 11554 and  
was localized on chromosome 4 (Wang et al. 2016). False smut resistance in several  
rice cultivars has been identified as a quantitative trait controlled by multiple genes  
(Andargie et al. 2018; Han et al. 2020). But, to date, no rice variety has been identi- 
fied  to  show  complete  resistance  to  false  smut,  whereas  many  cultivars  exhibit  

----------------------- Page 336-----------------------

 326                                                                                          M. Jamaloddin et al. 

   (a)  Blast                 False smut             Tungro           Bacterial leaf blight        Sheath blight 
     (Magnaporthe            (Ustilaginoidea     (Bacilli form an d      (Xanthomonas             (Rhizoctonia solani)  
        oryzae)                 virens)           spherical virus           oryzae) 

   (b) 
   l  m 
   a 
   n  s 
   o  a 
      l 
   i  p                                                                   MAS/ 
   t 
   i  m                                                                   MABC 
   d 
   a  r 
   r  e 
   t  g 
   f  e 
   o  c                                                                   GS/GE 
   t  i 
   e  r 
   s  d                                                           Omics  
   e  l 
      i                                               GWAS 
   s  w                                     QTL                 technology 
   r                                       mapping   approach 
   e  d                        Genome 
   v 
   i  n 
   D  a                       sequencing 
                     Target                Introgression and transfer of QTLs/genes 
                      traits 
                              Identiication, validation, and ine-mapping              High grain yield  

                 Trait discovery and deployment strategies  

Fig. 1   (a) An illustration of the different biotic diseases in rice and (b) a funnel diagram represent- 
ing the sources of valuable traits (tolerance of biotic diseases, yield components, and superior grain  
quality)  that  exist  in  traditional  and  wild  rice  germplasm.  Using  various  phenotypic  screening  
techniques and genome sequencing technologies can enable us to understand the molecular genet- 
ics and physiological mechanisms of stress tolerance. The identified genomic regions of QTLs and  
genes associated with the key traits play a vital role in understanding the interactions and further  
improving disease tolerance and superior grain quality traits with the help of marker-assisted selec- 
tion and genomic selection approaches for crop improvement 

considerable  differences  in  quantitative  field  resistance  to  the  pathogen  (Huang  
et al. 2019). According to previous studies, the genetics of sheath rot disease resis- 
tance  was  dissected  by  studying  the  segregating  pattern  in  an  F   population 2 
(Rajashekara  et  al.  2014;  Mvuyekure  et  al.  2017)  and  recombinant  inbred  lines  
(Graichen et al. 2010; Mahadevaiah et al. 2017). Some of these R-genes or loci have  
been extensively used in MAS breeding programs, and some of them have been  
fine-mapped and are undergoing cloning efforts. Detailed information on resistance  
genes/QTLs for economically important rice diseases (i.e., bacterial blight, blast,  
and sheath blight) appears in Tables 2, 3, and 4, respectively. 

4      Breeding for Disease Resistance 

Rice breeders have come up with many disease-resistant cultivars adapted to differ- 
ent rice-growing regions worldwide by applying conventional breeding approaches.  
Because of the dominance and epistasis effects of genes conferring resistance to a  
few diseases, gene pyramiding through conventional breeding methods becomes a  
challenge. Also, genes having similar responses to two or more races of a pathogen  
are  difficult  to  recognize  and  transfer  by  conventional  approaches  (Joseph  et  al.  
2004; Sundaram et al. 2009; Rajpurohit et al. 2011). The exercise of breeding for  

----------------------- Page 337-----------------------

Table 2   List of bacterial blight-resistance genes/QTLs                                                                                                        M 
                                                                                                                                                                o 
                                                                                                                                                                l 
                                                                                                                                                                e 
         Genes/                                                                                  Resistance to                     Marker                       c 
                                                                                                                                                                u 
                                                                                                                                                                l 
 S. No.  QTLs      Chr.  Position (bp)   Donor parent           Inheritance       Origin         Xoo race         Linked marker    type      References         a 
                                                                                                                                                                r 
                                                                                                                                                                  
 1       Xa-1      4     31,638,099–     Kogyoku, IRBB1         Dominant,         Japan          Japanese race-I  Npb235           RFLP      Yoshimura          A 
                                                                                                                                                                p 
                                                                                                                                                                p 
                         31,644,795                             cloned, and                                                                  et al. ( 1998)     r 
                                                                                                                                                                o 
                                                                characterized                                                                                   a 
                                                                                                                                                                c 
                                                                                                                                                                h 
 2       Xa-2      4                     IRBB2                  Dominant          Vietnam        Japanese         HZR950-5         SSR       Kurata and         e 
                                                                                                                                                                s 
                                                                                                                                                                  
                                                                                                                                                                f 
                                                                                                                                                                o 
                                                                                                 race-II                                     Yamazaki  
                                                                                                                                                                r 
                                                                                                                                                                  
                                                                                                                                             (2006)             D 
                                                                                                                                                                i 
                                                                                                                                                                s 
 3       Xa-3/      11   28,399,360–     WaseAikoku 3,          Dominant,         Japan          Chinese,         C481S            RFLP      Xiang et al.       e 
                                                                                                                                                                a 
                                                                                                                                                                s 
         Xa-26           28,402,773      Minghui 63, IRBB3      cloned, and                      Philippine, and                             (2006)             e 
                                                                                                                                                                  
                                                                characterized                    Japanese races                                                 R 
                                                                                                                                                                e 
                                                                                                                                                                s 
                                                                                                                                                                i 
 4       Xa-4       11   –               TKM6, IRBB4            Dominant          India          Philippine       Npb181 and       RFLP      Wang et al.        s 
                                                                                                                                                                t 
                                                                                                                                                                a 
                                                                                                 race-I           RM224            and SSR   (2001)             n 
                                                                                                                                                                c 
                                                                                                                                                                e 
 5       xa-5       5    437,010–        IRBB5                  Recessive,        Bangladesh     Philippine       RG556 and        CAPS      Petpisit et al.     i 
                                                                                                                                                                n 
                                                                                                                                                                  
                                                                                                                                                                R 
                         443,270                                cloned, and                      races I, II, and  RM122           and SSR   (1977) 
                                                                                                                                                                i 
                                                                characterized                    III                                                            c 
                                                                                                                                                                e 
 6       Xa-6/      11   –               Zenith                 Dominant          U.S.           Philippine       Y68SSRA          RFLP      Sidhu et al.  
         xa-3                                                                                    race-I                                      (1978) 
 7       Xa-7       6    –               DZ78                   Dominant          Bangladesh     Philippine       G1091,           RFLP,     Chen et al.  
                                                                                                 races            RM205S2          SSR       (2008) 
 8       xa-8       7    –               PI231128               Recessive         U.S.           Philippine       RM500,           SSR       Vikal et al.  
                                                                                                 races            RM533                      (2014) 
 9       Xa-9       11   –               Khao Lay Nhay and      Dominant          Laos           Philippine       C4S1S            RFLP      Ogawa  
                                         Sateng                                                  races                                       (1988) 
 10      Xa-10      11   22,203,734–     Cas 209                Dominant,         Senegal        Philippine and   M491/M419        RFLP,     Kurata and  
                         22,204,676                             cloned, and                      Japanese races                    GAPS      Yamazaki  
                                                                characterized                                                                (2006) 

                                                                                                                                               (continued) 
                                                                                                                                                                 3 
                                                                                                                                                                 2 
                                                                                                                                                                 7 

----------------------- Page 338-----------------------

                                                                                                                                                                                           3 
Table 2   (continued)                                                                                                                                                                      2 
                                                                                                                                                                                           8 
          Genes/                                                                                                Resistance to                           Marker  
 S. No.   QTLs         Chr.  Position (bp)      Donor parent              Inheritance           Origin          Xoo race            Linked marker       type        References 
 11       Xa-11        3     –                 IR8                        Dominant              Philippines     Japanese races      –                   –           Kurata and  
                                                                                                                IB, II, IIIA,                                       Yamazaki  
                                                                                                                and V                                               (2006) 
 12       Xa-12        4     –                  Kogyoku, Java14           Dominant              Japan           Indonesian          –                   –           Ogawa et al.  
                                                                                                                race-V                                              (1987) 
 13       xa-13        8     –                 BJ1, IRBB13                Recessive,            India           Philippine          RG136, xal3p        STS,        Kurata and  
                                                                          cloned, and                           race-6                                  SSR         Yamazaki  
                                                                          characterized                                                                             (2006) 
 14       Xa-14        4     –                  TN1                       Dominant              Taiwan          Philippine          VAZ190B/            RFLP        Kurata and  
                                                                                                                race 5              RG163                           Yamazaki  
                                                                                                                                                                    (2006) 
 15       xa-15              –                 M41 mutant                 Recessive             ND              Japanese races      –                   –           Ogawa  
                                                                                                                                                                    (2008) 
 16       Xa-16              –                  Tetep                     Dominant              Vietnam         Japanese races      –                   –           Kurata and  
                                                                                                                                                                    Yamazaki  
                                                                                                                                                                    (2006) 
 17       Xa-17              –                 Asominori                  Dominant              South Korea     Japanese races      –                   –           Kurata and  
                                                                                                                                                                    Yamazaki  
                                                                                                                                                                    (2006) 
 18       Xa-18              –                 IR24, Miyang23,            Dominant              Philippines,    Burmese races       –                   –           Kurata and  
                                                Toyonishiki                                     Japan                                                               Yamazaki  
                                                                                                                                                                    (2006)                M 
                                                                                                                                                                                          . 
                                                                                                                                                                                            
                                                                                                                                                                                          J 
 19       Xa-19        3     –                 XM5 (mutant of             Recessive             –               Japanese races      –                   –           Kurata and            a 
                                                                                                                                                                                          m 
                                                IR24)                                                                                                               Yamazaki              a 
                                                                                                                                                                                          l 
                                                                                                                                                                    (2006)                o 
                                                                                                                                                                                          d 
                                                                                                                                                                                          d 
                                                                                                                                                                                          i 
                                                                                                                                                                                          n 
                                                                                                                                                                                            
                                                                                                                                                                                          e 
                                                                                                                                                                                          t 
                                                                                                                                                                                            
                                                                                                                                                                                          a 
                                                                                                                                                                                          l 
                                                                                                                                                                                          . 

----------------------- Page 339-----------------------

                                                                                                                                                             M 
                                                                                                                                                             o 
                                                                                                                                                             l 
        Genes/                                                                                 Resistance to                    Marker                       e 
                                                                                                                                                             c 
                                                                                                                                                             u 
S. No.  QTLs      Chr.  Position (bp)   Donor parent          Inheritance        Origin       Xoo race         Linked marker    type      References         l 
                                                                                                                                                             a 
                                                                                                                                                             r 
                                                                                                                                                               
20      Xa-20           –              XM6 (mutant of         Recessive         –              Japanese races  –                –         Kurata and         A 
                                                                                                                                                             p 
                                        IR24)                                                                                             Yamazaki           p 
                                                                                                                                                             r 
                                                                                                                                                             o 
                                                                                                                                                             a 
                                                                                                                                          (2006) 
                                                                                                                                                             c 
                                                                                                                                                             h 
21      Xa-21      11   20,802,924–     O. longistaminata,    Dominant,         Africa, Mali   Philippine and  pTA248           STS       Song et al.        e 
                                                                                                                                                             s 
                                                                                                                                                               
                        20,806,518      IRBB21                cloned, and                      Japanese races                             (1995)             f 
                                                                                                                                                             o 
                                                                                                                                                             r 
                                                              characterized                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                             D 
                                                                                                                                                             i 
22      Xa-22(t)   11                   Zhach anglong         Dominant           China         Chinese races   L363B/P143       RFLP      Kurata and         s 
                                                                                                                                                             e 
                                                                                                                                                             a 
                                                                                                                                                             s 
                                                                                                                                          Yamazaki  
                                                                                                                                                             e 
                                                                                                                                                               
                                                                                                                                          (2006)             R 
                                                                                                                                                             e 
                                                                                                                                                             s 
23      Xa-23      11   22,203,734–     O. ruipogon (CBB23)   Dominant,          China/        Indonesian      –                –         Zhang et al.       i 
                                                                                                                                                             s 
                                                                                                                                                             t 
                        22,204,676                            cloned, and        Cambodia      races                                      (2001)             a 
                                                                                                                                                             n 
                                                                                                                                                             c 
                                                                                                                                                             e 
                                                              characterized 
                                                                                                                                                               
                                                                                                                                                             i 
24      xa-24     2                     DV86                  Recessive         Bangladesh     Philippine and  –                –         Khush and          n  
                                                                                                                                                             R 
                                                                                               Chinese races                              Angeles            i 
                                                                                                                                                             c 
                                                                                                                                          (1999)             e 

25      xa-25/     12   17,302,073–     Minghui 63, HX-3      Recessive,         China         Chinese and     –                –         Liu et al.  
        Xa25(t)         17,305,326      (somaclonal mutant    cloned, and                      Philippine                                 (2011) 
                                        of Minghui 63)        characterized                    races 
26      xa-26(t)   11   –               Nep Bha Bong          Recessive          China         Philippine      C4S1S/           RFLP      Lee et al.  
                                                                                               races           Y6855RA                    (2003) 
27      Xa-27(t)  6     –               O. minuta IRGC        Dominant,         Philippines    Chinese strains  M10S1, M1095    RFLP      Gu et al.  
                                        101141, IRBB27        cloned, and                      and Philippine                             (2005) 
                                                              characterized                    races 2–6 
28      xa-28(t)   11   –               Lota sail             Recessive          Bangladesh    Philippine      –                –         Lee et al.  
                                                                                               race 2                                     (2003) 
29      Xa-29(t)   1    –               O. officinalis (B5)   Dominant          –              Chinese races   –                –         Tan et al.  
                                                                                                                                          (2004) 
                                                                                                                                                              3 
                                                                                                                                                              2 
                                                                                                                                             (continued)      9 

----------------------- Page 340-----------------------

                                                                                                                                                                                          3 
Table 2   (continued)                                                                                                                                                                     3 
                                                                                                                                                                                          0 
          Genes/                                                                                                Resistance to                           Marker  
 S. No.   QTLs         Chr.  Position (bp)      Donor parent              Inheritance           Origin          Xoo race            Linked marker       type        References 
  30      Xa-30(t)     11    –                  O. ruipogon (Y238)        Dominant              India           Indonesian          –                   –           Cheema et al.  
                                                                                                                races                                               (2008) 
  31      xa-31(t)     4     –                 Zhach anglong              Recessive             China           Chinese races       –                   –           Wang et al.  
                                                                                                                                                                    (2009) 
  32      xa-32(t)     11    –                  O. australiensis          Recessive             –               Philippine          RM27256,            SSRs        Zheng et al.  
                                                (introgression line                                             races               27274                           (2009) 
                                                C4064) 
  33      Xa-33        7     –                 Ba7 O. nivara              Dominant              Thailand        Thai races          RMWR7.1 and         SSRs        Hari et al.  
                                                                                                                                    7.6                             (2013) 
  34      Xa-33(t)     6     –                 Ba7O. nivara               Dominant              Thailand        Thai race           RM20590             SSRs        Korinsak  
                                                                                                                                                                    et al. (2009) 
  35      xa-34(t)     1     –                  Pin Kaset O.              Recessive             Sri Lanka       Thai race           RM493,              SSRs        Chen et al.  
                                                brachyantha                                                                         RM446,                          (2011b) 
                                                                                                                                    RM10927,  
                                                                                                                                    RM10591 
  36      Xa-35(t)     11    –                  Oryza minuta (Acc.        Dominant              Philippines     Philippine          –                   –           Guo et al.  
                                                No. 101133)                                                     races                                               (2010) 
  37      Xa-36(t)     11    –                  C4059                     Dominant              China           Philippine          –                   –           Miao et al.  
                                                                                                                races                                               (2010) 
  38      Xa-38        4     –                  O. nivara                 Dominant              –               Indian Punjab       RM17499,            STS/        Bhasin et al.  
                                                IRGC81825                                                       races               RM459,              SSR         (2012) 
                                                                                                                                    RM317                                                 M 
                                                                                                                                                                                          . 
                                                                                                                                                                                            
                                                                                                                                                                                          J 
  39      Xa39         11    –                  FF329                     Dominant              –               Chinese and         RM21, RM206         STS/        Zhang et al.          a 
                                                                                                                                                                                          m 
                                                                                                                Philippine                              SSR         (2015)                a 
                                                                                                                                                                                          l 
                                                                                                                                                                                          o 
                                                                                                                                                                                          d 
                                                                                                                races 
                                                                                                                                                                                          d 
                                                                                                                                                                                          i 
  40      Xa40(t)      11    –                  IR65482-7-216-1-2         Dominant              –               Korean BB           RM27320,            STS/        Kim et al.            n 
                                                                                                                                                                                            
                                                                                                                                                                                          e 
                                                                                                                races               ID55, WA18-5        SSR         (2015)                t  
                                                                                                                                                                                          a 
                                                                                                                                                                                          l 
                                                                                                                                                                                          . 

----------------------- Page 341-----------------------

                                                                                                                                                           M 
                                                                                                                                                           o 
                                                                                                                                                           l 
        Genes/                                                                                Resistance to                    Marker                      e 
                                                                                                                                                           c 
                                                                                                                                                           u 
 S. No. QTLs       Chr. Position (bp)   Donor parent          Inheritance       Origin        Xoo race        Linked marker    type      References        l 
                                                                                                                                                           a 
                                                                                                                                                           r 
                                                                                                                                                             
 41     xa41(t)    –    –               Rice germplasm        Dominant          –             Various Xoo     –                –         Hutin et al.      A 
                                                                                                                                                           p 
                                                                                              strains                                    (2015)            p 
                                                                                                                                                           r 
                                                                                                                                                           o 
 42     xa42       3    –               XM14 , a mutant of    Dominant          –             Japanese Xoo    RM15189          SSR       Busungu           a 
                                                                                                                                                           c 
                                                                                                                                                           h 
                                                                                                                                                           e 
                                        IR24                                                  races                                      et al. (2016) 
                                                                                                                                                           s 
                                                                                                                                                             
                                                                                                                                                           f 
                                                                                                                                                           o 
 43     Xa-43 (t)  11    11,92,907–     IR36(P8)              Dominant          –             Korean BB       –                –         Kim and  
                                                                                                                                                           r 
                                                                                                                                                             
                                                                                                                                                           D 
                         11,943,779                                                           races                                      Reinke  
                                                                                                                                                           i 
                                                                                                                                         (2019)            s 
                                                                                                                                                           e 
                                                                                                                                                           a 
 44     Xa-44 (t)  11    11,964,077–    R73571-3B-11-3-       Dominant          –             Korean BB       –                –         Kim (2018)        s 
                                                                                                                                                           e 
                                                                                                                                                             
                         11,985,463     K3(P6)                                                races                                                        R 
                                                                                                                                                           e 
                                                                                                                                                           s 
                                                                                                                                                           i 
 45     Xa-45(t)   8     26,737,175–    O. glaberrima IRGC    Recessive         –             Indian Punjab   xa13 prom        STS       (Neelam           s 
                                                                                                                                                           t 
                                                                                                                                                           a 
                                                                                                                                                           n 
                         26,818,765     102600B                                               races                                      et al. 2020) 
                                                                                                                                                           c 
                                                                                                                                                           e 
 46     Xa46(t)    11   –               Mutant line H 120     Dominant          China         Chinese Xoo     RM26981–         SSR       Chen et al.         
                                                                                                                                                           i 
                                                                                                                                                           n 
                                                                                              races           RM26984                    (2020)              
                                                                                                                                                           R 
                                                                                                                                                           i 
                                                                                                                                                           c 
Source: Revised and updated from Kou and Wang (2013)                                                                                                       e 

                                                                                                                                                            3 
                                                                                                                                                            3 
                                                                                                                                                            1 

----------------------- Page 342-----------------------

332                                                                          M. Jamaloddin et al. 

Table 3   List of blast resistance genes/QTLs 

         Gene/             Position      Position   Donor rice        Method of  
 S. No.  QTL         Chr.  (bp)          (cM)      variety            identification  References 
 1       Pit          1    2,270,216–    9.08–     Tjahaja            Cloned          Hayashi  
                           3,043,185      12.17                                       and  
                                                                                      Yoshida  
                                                                                      (2009) 
 2       Pi27(t)      1    6,230,045–    24.29–    IR64 (I)           Mapped          Sallaud  
                           6,976,491      27.90                       within          et al.  
                                                                      21.6 cM         (2003) 
 3       Pi24(t)      1    5,242,654–    20.97–    Azuenca (J)        QTL mapping     Zhuang  
                           5,556,378      22.22                                       et al.  
                                                                                      (2002) 
 4       Pitp(t)      1    25,135,400–    100.54–  Tetep              Cosegregation   Barman  
                           28,667,306     117.49                      marker was      et al.  
                                                                      identified      (2004) 
 5       Pi35(t)      1    33,000,000–    132.0–   Hokkai 188 (J)     Cloned          Xu et al.  
                           34,150,000     136.6                                       (2014) 
 6       Pi37         1    33,110,281–    132.44–  St. No. 1 (J)      Cloned          Lin et al.  
                           33,489,931     133.95                                      (2007) 
 7       Pi64         1    –             –         Yangmaogu (J)      Cloned          Ma et al.  
                                                                                      (2015a) 
 8       Pid1(t)      2    21,875,000–   87.5–     Digu               Mapped          Chen et al.  
                           22,475,000    89.9                         within          (2004) 
                                                                      11.8 cM 
 9       Pig(t)       2    34,346,727–    137.38–  Guangchang         Mapped          Zhou et al.  
                           35,135,783     140.54   zhan (I)           within          (2004) 
                                                                      11.8 cM 
 10      Pitq5        2    37,625,000–    150.5–   Teqing             QTL mapping     Tabien  
                           39,475,000     157.9                                       et al.  
                                                                                      (2002) 
 11      Piy1(t)      2    38,300,000–    153.2–   Yanxian No. 1      Mapped          Lei et al.  
                           38,525,000     154.1                       within 1.6 cM   (2005) 
 12      Piy2(t)      2    38,300,000–    153.2–   Yanxian No. 1      Mapped          Lei et al.  
                           38,525,001     154.1                       within 3.0 cM   (2005) 
 13      Pib          2    38,300,000–    153.2–   Tohoku IL9         Cloned          Wang et al.  
                           38,525,000     154.1                                       (1999) 
 14      Pi25(t)      2    34,360,810–    137.44–  IR64 (I)           QTL mapping     Wu and  
                           37,725,160     150.90                                      Tanksley  
                                                                                      (1993) 
 15      Pi14(t)      2    1–6,725,831    1.00–    Maowangu           Linkage         Pan et al.  
                                          26.90                       analysis using  (1996) 
                                                                      isozyme  
                                                                      markers 
 16      Pi16(t)      2    1–6,725,831    1.00–    Aus373 (I)         Linkage         Pan and  
                                          26.91                       analysis using  Tanisaka  
                                                                      isozyme         (1997) 
                                                                      markers 

                                                                                      (continued) 

----------------------- Page 343-----------------------

Molecular Approaches for Disease Resistance in Rice                                                    333 

Table 3   (continued) 

          Gene/               Position       Position   Donor rice           Method of  
 S. No.   QTL          Chr.   (bp)            (cM)      variety              identification    References 
  17      Pi68(t)       3     14,738–        9.30–      INGR15002            QTL mapping       Devi et al.  
                              14,761         9.70                                              (2020) 
  18      Pi63/         4     –              –          Kahei                Cloned            Xu et al.  
          Pikahei-                                                                             (2014) 
          1(t) 
  19     pi21           4     5,242,654–     20.97–     Owarihatamochi       Cloned            Fukuoka  
                              5,556,378        22.22                                           et al.  
                                                                                               (2009) 
  20      Pikur1        4     24,611,955–    98.44–     Kuroka (J)           Linkage           Goto  
                              33,558,479       134.23                        analysis using    (1988) 
                                                                             phenotypic  
                                                                             marker 
  21      Pi39(t)       4     26,850,000–     107.4–    Chubu 111 (J)        Mapped            Liu et al.  
                              27,050,000       108.2                         within 0.3 cM     (2007) 
  22      Pi(t)         4     2,270,216–     9.08–      Tjahaja              Linkage           Causse  
                              3,043,185        12.17                         analysis using    et al.  
                                                                             phenotypic        (1994) 
                                                                             marker 
  23      Pi26(t)       5     8,751,256–     35.00–     Gumei 2 (I)          QTL mapping       Wu and  
                              11,676,579       46.70                                           Tanksley  
                                                                                               (1993) 
  24      Pi23(t)       5     10,755,867–    43.02–     Sweon 365            QTL mapping       Ahn et al.  
                              19,175,845       76.70                                           (1997) 
  25      Pi10          5     14,521,809–    58.08–     Tongil               Mapped            Naqvi et al.  
                              18,854,305       75.41                         within 6.7 cM     (1995) 
  26      Pi2           6     –              –          C101A51              Cloned            Zhou et al.  
                                                                                               (2006) 
  27      Pi22(t)       6     4,897,048–      19.50–    Suweon365 (J)        QTL mapping       Ahn et al.  
                              6,023,472        24.09                                           (1997) 
  28      Pi26(t)       6     8,751,256–     35.00–     Azucena (J)          QTL mapping       Wu et al.  
                              11,676,579       46.70                                           (2005) 
  29      Pi27(t)       6     5,556,378–     22.22–     IR64 (I)             Mapped            Sallaud  
                              744,329        2.97                            within            et al.  
                                                                             21.6 cM           (2003) 
  30      Pi40(t)       6     16,274,830–    65.09–     O. australiensis     Mapped            Jeung et al.  
                              17,531,111       70.12    (W)                  within 1.8 cM     (2007) 
  31      Piz           6     10,155,975–    40.60–     Zenith (J)           Mapped            Ahn et al.  
                              10,517,612       42.07                         within            (1996) 
                                                                             0.43 cM 
  32      Piz-t         6     14,675,000       58.70    Toride 1             Cloned            Hayashi  
                                                                                               et al.  
                                                                                               (2006) 
  33      Pi9           6     10,386,510–    41.50–     O. minuta (W)        Cloned            Qu et al.  
                              10,389,466       41.55                                           (2006) 

                                                                                               (continued) 

----------------------- Page 344-----------------------

334                                                                                   M. Jamaloddin et al. 

Table 3   (continued) 

          Gene/               Position        Position   Donor rice           Method of  
 S. No.   QTL           Chr.  (bp)            (cM)       variety              identification    References 
  34      Pi25          6     18,080,056–     72.32–     Gumei 2              Cloned            Chen et al.  
                              19,257,588       77.03                                            (2011a) 
  35      Pid2          6     17,159,337–     68.63–     Digu                 Cloned            Chen et al.  
                              17,163,868       68.65                                            (2006b) 
  36      Pigm(t)       6     10,367,751–     41.47–     Gumei 4              Mapped            Deng et al.  
                              10,421,545       41.68                          within 70 kb      (2017) 
  37      Pi50          6     –               –          Er-Ba-zhan           Cloned            Su et al.  
                                                         (EBZ)                                  (2015) 
  38      Pid3-I1       6     –               –          MC276                Cloned            Inukai  
                                                                                                et al.  
                                                                                                (2019) 
  39      Pi17(t)       7     22,250,443–     89.00–     DJ 123               Mapped            Pan et al.  
                              24,995,083       99.90                          within 1.8 cM     (1996) 
  40      Pi36          8     2,870,061–      11.48–     Q61 (I)              Cloned            Liu et al.  
                              2,884,353        11.53                                            (2005) 
  41      Pi33          8     5,915,858–      23.66–     IR64 (I)             Mapped            Berruyer  
                              6,152,906        24.61                          within 1.6 cM     et al.  
                                                                                                (2003) 
  42      Pizh          8     4,372,113–      17.48–     Zhai-Ya-Quing8       QTL mapping       Sallaud  
                              21,012,219       84.04     (I)                                    et al.  
                                                                                                (2003) 
  43      Pi29(t)       8     9,664,057–      38.65–     IR64 (I)             Mapped            Sallaud  
                              16,241,105       64.96                          within 0.7 cM     et al.  
                                                                                                (2003) 
  44      Pii2(t)       9     1,022,662–      4.09–      Azucena              Linkage           Kinoshita  
                              7,222,779        28.89                          analysis using    and  
                                                                              phenotypic        Kiyosawa  
                                                                              markers           (1997) 
  45      Pi5           9     7,825,000–      31.30–     RIL125,              Mapped            Lee et al.  
                              8,250,000        33.00     RIL249, RIL260   within 170 kb         (2009) 
                                                         (Moroberekan) 
  46      Pi3(t)        9     7,825,000–      31.3–      Kan-Tao              Linkage           Causse  
                              8,250,001       33.1                            analysis using    et al.  
                                                                              RFLP markers      (1994) 
  47      Pi15          9     9,641,358–      38.56–     GA25 (J)             Mapped            Pan et al.  
                              9,685,993        38.74                          within 0.7 cM     (1996) 
  48      Pii           9     –               –          Hitomebore           Cloned            Takagi  
                                                                                                et al.  
                                                                                                (2013a) 
  49      Pi28(t)       10    19,565,132–     78.26–     IR64 (I)             QTL mapping       Sallaud  
                              22,667,948       90.67                                            et al.  
                                                                                                (2003) 
  50      Pia           11    –               –          Aichi Asahi (J)      Cloned            Okuyama  
                                                                                                et al.  
                                                                                                (2011) 

                                                                                                (continued) 

----------------------- Page 345-----------------------

Molecular Approaches for Disease Resistance in Rice                                                   335 

Table 3   (continued) 

          Gene/              Position        Position   Donor rice         Method of  
 S. No.   QTL          Chr.  (bp)            (cM)      variety             identification    References 
  51      PiCO39(t)     11   6,304,007–      25.21–    CO39 (I)            Cloned            Cesari  
                             6,888,870       27.55                                           et al.  
                                                                                             (2013) 
  52      Pilm2         11   13,635,033–     54.54–    Lemont              QTL mapping       Tabien  
                             28,377,565       113.50                                         et al.  
                                                                                             (2002) 
  53      Pi30(t)       11   441,392–        1.76–     IR64 (I)            QTL mapping       Sallaud  
                             6,578,785       26.31                                           et al.  
                                                                                             (2003) 
  54      Pi7(t)        11   17,850,000–     71.40–    RIL29               QTL mapping       Wang et al.  
                             21,075,000      84.30     (Moroberekan)                         (1994) 
  55      Pi34          11   19,423,000–     77.69–    Chubu32 (J)         QTL mapping       Zenbayashi  
                             19,490,000      77.96                                           et al.  
                                                                                             (2002) 
  56      Pi38          11   19,137,900–     76.55–    Tadukan (I)         Mapped            Gowda  
                             21,979,485      87.91                         within 20 cM      et al.  
                                                                                             (2006) 
  57      PBR           11   20,125,000–     80.5–     St. No. 1           Mapped            Fujii et al.  
                             30,075,000      120.3                         within            (1995) 
                                                                           22.9 cM 
  58      Pb1           11   –               –         Modan               Cloned            Hayashi  
                                                                                             et al.  
                                                                                             (2010) 
  59      Pi44(t)       11   22,850,000–     91.40–    RIL29               –                 Chen et al.  
                             29,475,000       117.90   (Moroberekan)                         (1999) 
  60      Pik-h/        11   24,761,902–     99.0–     Tetep               Cloned            Sharma  
          Pi54               24,762,922      99.05                                           et al.  
                                                                                             (2005b) 
  61      Pi1           11   26,498,854–     105.99–   LAC23 (J)           Mapped            Hua et al.  
                             28,374,448       113.49                       within            (2012) 
                                                                            11.4 cM 
  62      Pik-m         11   27,314,916–     109.25–   Tsuyuake (J)        Cloned            Ashikawa  
                             27,532,928       110.13                                         et al.  
                                                                                             (2008) 
  63      Pi18(t)       11   26,796,917–     107.18–   Suweon365 (J)       Mapped using      Ahn et al.  
                             28,376,959       113.50                       RFLP markers      (1996) 
  64      Pik           11   27,314,916–     109.25–   Kusabue (I)         Cloned            Zhai et al.  
                             27,532,928       110.13                                         (2011) 
  65      Pik-p         11                             K60                 Cloned            Yuan et al.  
                                                                                             (2011) 
  66      Pik-s         11   27,314,916–     109.25–   Shin 2 (J)          Mapped            Fjellstrom  
                             27,532,929       110.15                       within 2.7 cM     et al.  
                                                                                             (2004) 

                                                                                             (continued) 

----------------------- Page 346-----------------------

336                                                                                  M. Jamaloddin et al. 

Table 3   (continued) 

          Gene/               Position        Position   Donor rice          Method of  
 S. No.   QTL          Chr.   (bp)            (cM)       variety             identification    References 
  67      Pik-g         11    27,314,916–     109.25–    GA20 (J)            Linkage           Pan et al.  
                              27,532,930       110.16                        analysis to       (1996) 
                                                                             other  
                                                                             resistance  
                                                                             genes 
  68      Pise1         11    5,740,642–      22.96–     Sensho              Linkage           Goto  
                              16,730,739      66.92                          analysis using    (1970) 
                                                                             phenotypic  
                                                                             markers 
  69      Pif           11    24,695,583–     98.78–     Chugoku 31-1        QTL mapping       Shinoda  
                              28,462,103       113.84    (St. No. 1)                           et al.  
                                                                                               (1971) 
  70      Mpiz          11    4,073,024–      16.29–     Zenith (J)          Linkage           Goto  
                              16,730,739      66.92                          analysis using    (1970) 
                                                                             phenotypic  
                                                                             markers 
  71      Pikur2        11    2,840,211–      11.36–     Kuroka (J)          Linkage           Goto  
                              18,372,685      73.49                          analysis using    (1988) 
                                                                             phenotypic  
                                                                             markers 
  72      Piisi         11    2,840,211–      11.36–     Imochi Shirazu      Linkage           Goto  
                              19,029,573      76.11      (J)                 analysis using    (1970) 
                                                                             phenotypic  
                                                                             markers 
  73      Pike          11                               Xiangzao 143        Cloned            Chen et al.  
                                                                                               (2015) 
  74      Pi24(t)       12    5,242,654–      20.97–     Azuenca (J)         QTL mapping       Zhuang  
                              5,556,378       22.22                                            et al.  
                                                                                               (2002) 
  75      Pi62(t)       12    2,426,648–      9.70–      Yashiro-mochi       Mapped            Wu et al.  
                              18,050,026      77.00      (J), Tsuyuake       within 1.9 cM     (2008) 
  76      Pitq6         12    5,758,663–      23.00–     Tequing (I)         QTL mapping       Tabien  
                              7,731,471       30.92                                            et al.  
                                                                                               (2002) 
  77      Pi6(t)        12    1–6,725,831     1–1.68     Apura (I)           –                 McCouch  
                                                                                               et al.  
                                                                                               (1994) 
  78      Pi12          12    6,988,220–      27.95–     Moroberekan (J)     Linkage           Inukai  
                              15,120,464      60.48                          analysis using    et al.  
                                                                             RFLP markers      (1996) 
  79      Pi21(t)       12    5,242,654–      20.94–     Owarihata           –                 Ahn et al.  
                              5,556,378       22.22      mochi (J)                             (1997) 
  80      Pi31(t)       12    7,731,471–      30.92–     IR64 (I)            QTL mapping       Sallaud  
                              11,915,469      47.66                                            et al.  
                                                                                               (2003) 

                                                                                               (continued) 

----------------------- Page 347-----------------------

Molecular Approaches for Disease Resistance in Rice                                               337 

Table 3   (continued) 

         Gene/              Position       Position   Donor rice         Method of  
 S. No.  QTL          Chr.  (bp)           (cM)       variety            identification   References 
 81      Pi32(t)      12     13,103,039–   52.41–     IR64 (I)           QTL mapping      Sallaud  
                             18,867,450    75.46                                          et al.  
                                                                                          (2003) 
 82      Pi157        12     12,375,000–   49.5–      Moroberekan        Mapped           Causse  
                             15,550,000    62.2                          within 9.5 cM    et al.  
                                                                                          (1994) 
 83      Pita         12     10,603,772–   42.41–     Tadukan (I)        Cloned           Hayashi  
                             10,609,330    42.43                                          et al.  
                                                                                          (2006) 
 84      Pita-2       12     10,078,620–   40.31–     Shimokita (J)      Mapped           Nakamura  
                             13,211,331    52.84                         within 4.0 cM    et al.  
                                                                                          (1997) 
 85      Pi19(t)      12    8,826,555–     35.30–     Aichi Asahi (J)    Linkage          Iwata  
                             13,417,088    53.67                         analysis to      (1996) 
                                                                         other  
                                                                         resistance  
                                                                         genes 
 86      Pi39(t)      12    –              –          Chubu 111 (J),     Mapped           Liu et al.  
                                                                         within 37 kb     (2007) 
 87      Pi20(t)      12     12,875,000–   51.50–     IR24 (I)           Mapped           Liu et al.  
                             12,950,000    51.80                         within 0.6 cM    (2008) 
 88      PiGD-3(t)    12     13,950,000    55.80      Sanhuangzhan 2     QTL mapping      Liu et al.  
                                                                                          (2005) 
 89      Ptr          12                              Katy               Cloned           Zhao et al.  
                                                                                          (2018) 

Source: Revised and updated from Tanweer et al. (2015) 

disease  resistance  could  never  obtain  a  break  because  of  the  emergence  of  new  
pathotypes, which could overcome the resistance. Advances in rice genomics pro- 
vided tools such as molecular markers for plant breeders to effectively develop cul- 
tivars  with  resistance  against  various  diseases,  which  is  an  environment-friendly  
alternative vis-à-vis the use of agrochemicals (Miah et al. 2013). Molecular markers  
can be used to map and introgress one or more desired genes for biotic and abiotic  
stress resistance from diverse gene pools (Suh et al. 2009). Marker-assisted selec- 
tion for pyramiding desired genes without altering other quality characteristics of a  
rice cultivar is crucial in rice improvement (Sundaram et al. 2008; Suh et al. 2009;  
Shanti et al. 2010). As an added advantage, the availability of gene-linked molecular  
markers for the resistance genes eases the identification of plants harboring two or  
more R-genes at any growth stage without a bioassay (Sundaram et al. 2008; Shanti  
et al. 2010; Bainsla and Meena 2016). 
    Three bacterial blight-resistance genes (xa5, xa13, and Xa21) were pyramided  
into  susceptible  cultivar  PR106  using  MAS.  The  introgression  lines  were  tested  
against 17 Xoo isolates under both glasshouse and field conditions. The trials sug- 
gested that the combination of genes provided broad-spectrum resistance against  

----------------------- Page 348-----------------------

                                                                                                                                                                         3 
Table 4   List of sheath blight-resistance genes/QTLs                                                                                                                    3 
                                                                                                                                                                         8 
                                  Linked                                         Type of           Associated  
 S. No.  QTLs               Chr.  markers         Mapping population             marker    LOD     character            Remarks                        Reference 
 1       qshb1.1            1     RM151–          210 F  2                       SSR       10.7    Percentage           32 candidate genes             Yadav et al.  
                                                               I             I                                          identified in the region       (2015) 
                                  RM12253         (ARC10531  × BPT-5204 )        (70)              relative lesion  
                                                                                                   height               qShB9.2 
 2       qshb7.1            7     RM81–                                                    8.8 
                                  RM615 
 3       qshb7.2            7     RM10–                                                    6.7 
                                  RM2169 
 4       qshb8.1            8     RM21792–                                                 4.2 
                                  RM310 
 5       qSBL7 (E2)         7     D760–           190 F2 (Yangdao                SSR       3.12    DR (disease          Sheath blight resistance is    Wen et al.  
                                  RM248            I           J                                   rating)              correlated with plant height   (2015) 
                                                  4  × Lemont )                  (52) and  
                                                                                 InDel  
                                                                                 (128) 
 6       qSBPL-7 (E2)       7     D760–                                                    5.07    LH (lesion height) 
                                  RM248 
 7       qSBD-12-2 (E1)     12    RM1246–                                                  3.74    PL (percentage of  
                                  D1252                                                            lesion height),  
                                                                                                   DR, LH 

                                                                  I       J 
 8       qHZaLH3            3     RM143–          116 DHs (TN1  × CJ06 )         SSR                                    No correlation was found       Zeng et al.  
                                  RM514                                          (214)                                  between LH and PH              (2015) 
 10      qHZaLH6            6     WX–RM587 
                                                                                                                                                                         M 
 11      qHZaDR8            8     RM1376–                                                                                                                                . 
                                                                                                                                                                           
                                                                                                                                                                         J 
                                  RM4085                                                                                                                                 a 
                                                                                                                                                                         m 
                                                                                                                                                                         a 
 13      qHZaDR9            9     RM444–                                                                                                                                 l 
                                                                                                                                                                         o 
                                  AGPSMA                                                                                                                                 d 
                                                                                                                                                                         d 
                                                                                                                                                                         i 
                                                                                                                                                                         n 
 14      qHZbDR5            5     RM3321–                                                                                                                                  
                                                                                                                                                                         e 
                                                                                                                                                                         t 
                                  RM3616                                                                                                                                   
                                                                                                                                                                         a 
                                                                                                                                                                         l 
                                                                                                                                                                         . 

----------------------- Page 349-----------------------

                                                                                                                                                                  M 
                                                                                                                                                                  o 
                                                                                                                                                                  l 
                                Linked                                       Type of           Associated                                                         e 
                                                                                                                                                                  c 
                                                                                                                                                                  u 
S. No.  QTLs              Chr.  markers        Mapping population            marker    LOD     character           Remarks                       Reference        l 
                                                                                                                                                                  a 
                                                                                                                                                                  r 
              TQ                                                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                  A 
15      qSB-9             9     CY-85 and      235CSSLs (BC F ) 6 3          InDel     –       ShB resistance      Fine-mapped (146 kb           Zuo et al.  
                                                       I                J                                                                                         p 
                                Y86            (Teqing  (TQ) × Lemont )      and                                   covering region), 12 genes    (2014)           p 
                                                                                                                                                                  r 
                                                                                                                                                                  o 
                                                                                                                                                                  a 
                                                                             CAPS                                  were annotated 
                                                                                                                                                                  c 
                                                                             (22)                                                                                 h 
                                                                                                                                                                  e 
                                                                                                                                                                  s 
                                                                                                                                                                    
16      qDR-4             4     RM1155–         155 RILs F                   SSR       2.71    DR                  Epistasis and                 Liu et al.       f 
                                                           8:11 
                                                                                                                                                                  o 
                                                                                                                                                                  r 
                                RM 5757        (RSB02 × HH1B)                (163)                                 QTL × environment (QE)        (2014)             
                                                                                                                                                                  D 
                                                                                               LL (lesion length) 
                                                                                                                                                                  i 
                                                                                                                                                                  s 
                                                                                                                   interaction were studied 
                                                                                                                                                                  e 
                                                                                                                                                                  a 
17      qRLL-4            4     RM1155–                                                5.84    LH                                                                 s 
                                                                                                                                                                  e 
                                                                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                  R 
                                RM5757 
                                                                                                                                                                  e 
                                                                                                                                                                  s 
18      qRLH-4            4     RM1155–                                                4.77    Relative LL                                                        i 
                                                                                                                                                                  s 
                                                                                                                                                                  t 
                                RM5757                                                                                                                            a 
                                                                                                                                                                  n 
                                                                                               Relative LH 
                                                                                                                                                                  c 
                                                                                                                                                                  e 
               LE 
19      qSB-11             11   Z22-27C and     112CSSLs                     STS       –       ShB resistance      Fine-mapped (79 kb            Zuo et al.         
                                                                                                                                                                  i 
                                                       I          J                                                                                               n 
                                Z23-33C        (Teqing  × Lemont  (LE)       and                                   covering region), 11 genes    (2013)             
                                                                                                                                                                  R 
                                                                                                                                                                  i 
                                                                                                                                                                  c 
                                                                             CAPS                                  were annotated 
                                                                                                                                                                  e 
20      qRTL3             3     RM570          BILs                          SSR       3.5     RTL (rate of                                      Taguchi-  
                                               (JarjanI              J                                                                           Shiobara  
                                                        × Koshihikari )      (151)             tillers with  
                                                                                               lesions)                                          et al.  
                                                                                                                                                 (2013) 
21      qRTL5             5     RM5784                                                 4.3 
22      qRTL6             6     RM1161                                                 7.7 
23      qRTL9             9     RM6251                                                 3.1 
24      qRTL3             3     RM16200                                                5.9 
25      qRTL6             6     RM2615                                                 2.9 
26      qRTL12             12   RM7025                                                 3.2 
27      qRTL5             5     RM3286                                                 3.1 
28      qRTL6             6     RM6395                                                 5.8 
                                                                                                                                                                  3 
                                                                                                                                                                  3 
                                                                                                                                                 (continued)      9 

----------------------- Page 350-----------------------

                                                                                                                                                                                     3 
Table 4   (continued)                                                                                                                                                                4 
                                                                                                                                                                                     0 
                                     Linked                                           Type of             Associated  
 S. No.   QTLs                Chr.   markers         Mapping population               marker      LOD     character             Remarks                           Reference 
  29      qRTL9               9      RM3533                                                       3.8 
  30      qShB2-1-            2      RM279–           216 RILs (Jasmine               SSR         3.7     ShB resistance        The major QTL qShB9-2             Liu et al.  
                                     RM71             85I           J                                                                                             (2013) 
                                                          × Lemont )                  (199)                                     was reconfirmed based on  
                                                                                                                                the field data 
  31      ARqShB7-AR          7      RM5711–                                                      4.0 
                                     RM2 
  32      qShB7 LA            7      RM5711–                                                      6.0 
                                     RM2 
  33      qShB11-1-           11     RM7203–                                                      3.2 
                                     RM536 
  34      TXqShB11-2-TX       11     RM536–                                                       3.3 
                                     RM229 
  35      qShB6 (wild         6      RM3431–          252 Wild-1 and 253 Wild-2       SSR         7.8     ShB resistance        Colocalization of qShB6           Eizenga  
          1-field 2009)              RM3183          BC F2  2                         (131)                                     with qDH1 and qShB1 with          et al.  
                                                                                                                                qPH1 revealed the influence   (2013) 
                                                                                                                                of heading date and plant  
                                                                                                                                height on resistance 
  36      qShB6 (wild         6      RM253–           (Oryzanivara × BengalJ (O.                  21.2 

          2-field 2009)              RM3431          sativa)) 
  37      qShB6               6      RM253–                                                       11.1 
          (wild2-field               RM3431 
          2008)                                                                                                                                                                      M 
                                                                                                                                                                                     . 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
                                                                                                                                                                                     J 
  38      qShB1 (wild         1      RM431–                                                       4.7                                                                                a 
                                                                                                                                                                                     m 
          2-field 2008)              RM1361                                                                                                                                          a 
                                                                                                                                                                                     l 
                                                                                                                                                                                     o 
  39      qShB6-mc            6      RM3183–                                                      3.3                                                                                d 
                                                                                                                                                                                     d 
                                                                                                                                                                                     i 
          (wild-1                    RM541                                                                                                                                           n 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
                                                                                                                                                                                     e 
          microchamber)                                                                                                                                                              t  
                                                                                                                                                                                     a 
                                                                                                                                                                                     l 
                                                                                                                                                                                     . 

----------------------- Page 351-----------------------

                                                                                                                                                            M 
                                                                                                                                                            o 
                                                                                                                                                            l 
                               Linked                                     Type of          Associated                                                       e 
                                                                                                                                                            c 
                                                                                                                                                            u 
S. No.  QTLs             Chr.  markers        Mapping population          marker    LOD    character           Remarks                      Reference       l 
                                                                                                                                                            a 
                                                                                                                                                            r 
                                                                                                                                                              
40      qsbr_2.1         2     RM8254–        197 DHs                     SSR       3.4–   SBF (sheath                                      Nelson          A 
                                                          I           J                                                                                     p 
                               RM8252         (MCR10277  × Cocodrie )     (111)     29.7   blight disease                                   et al.          p 
                                                                                                                                                            r 
                                                                                                                                                            o 
                                                                                                                                                            a 
                                                                                                                                            (2012) 
                                                                                                                                                            c 
                                                                                                                                                            h 
41      qsbr_2.2         2     RM3857–                                              2.9–   severity in field),                                              e 
                                                                                                                                                            s 
                                                                                                                                                              
                               RM5404                                               37.8   SBI (disease                                                     f 
                                                                                                                                                            o 
                                                                                                                                                            r 
                                                                                           severity in                                                        
                                                                                                                                                            D 
                                                                                                                                                            i 
                                                                                           microchamber)                                                    s 
                                                                                                                                                            e 
                                                                                                                                                            a 
42      qsbr_12.1         12   RM3747–                                              49.1   SBM (disease                                                     s 
                                                                                                                                                            e 
                                                                                                                                                              
                               RM27608                                                     severity in mist                                                 R 
                                                                                                                                                            e 
                                                                                           chamber)                                                         s 
                                                                                                                                                            i 
                                                                                                                                                            s 
                                                                                                                                                            t 
43      qSBR1             1    RM11229        217 core collection of      SSR       9.5%   Sheath blight                                    Jia et al.      a 
                                                                                                                                                            n 
                                                                                                                                                            c 
                                              USDA                        (154)            resistance                                       (2012)          e 
                                                                                                                                                              
                                                                                                                                                            i 
                                                                                                                                                            n 
                                                                          and  
                                                                                                                                                              
                                                                          InDel                                                                             R 
                                                                                                                                                            i 
                                                                                                                                                            c 
                                                                          (1)                                                                               e 

44      qSBR11            11   RM7203                                               1.9% 
45      qSBR1-1,          1, 2 RM5389–        121 RIL (RSB03 × HH1B)      SSR       3.2,   DR                                               Fu et al.  
        qSBR2-1                RM3825,                                    (123)     3.1    LL                                               (2011) 
                               RM5340– 
                                                                                           LH 
                               RM521 
46      qSBR2-2          2     RM110–                                               5.2    Relative LL 
                               osr14 
47      qSBR2-3          2     RM7245–                                              3.3    Relative LH 
                               RM5303 
48      qSBR4            4     RM3288–                                              3.8 
                               RM7187 

                                                                                                                                            (continued) 
                                                                                                                                                             3 
                                                                                                                                                             4 
                                                                                                                                                             1 

----------------------- Page 352-----------------------

                                                                                                                                                                                           3 
Table 4   (continued)                                                                                                                                                                      4 
                                                                                                                                                                                           2 
                                      Linked                                             Type of              Associated  
 S. No.   QTLs                 Chr.   markers          Mapping population                marker      LOD      character              Remarks                           Reference 
  49      qSBR5-2               5     RM7446–                                                        4.8 
                                      RM3620 
  50      qSBR7                 7     RM1132–                                                        3.3 
                                      RM473 
  51      qSBR8                 8     RM8264–                                                        4.2 
                                      RM1109 
  52      qSBR9                 9     RM23869–                                                       5.0 
                                      RM3769 
  53      qShB1                 1     RM431–           251 DHs                           SSR         5.18–    Sheath blight                                            Xu et al.  
                                                                   I             J 
          (2007/2008)                 RM12017          (Baiyeqiu  × Maybelle )           (227)       8.03    resistance                                                (2011) 
  54      qShB2 (2008)          2     RM174–                                                         3.96 
                                      RM145 
  55      qShB3 (2007)          3     RM135–                                                         3.42 
                                      RM186 
  56      qShB5 (2007)          5     RM18872–                                                       4.35 
                                      RM421 

                                                                                   I 
  57      qShB1-2 (2020)        1                       184 RILs (SH × DGWG ;                        5.71     Blast resistance                                         Goad et al.  
                                                                         I 
                                                       BHA × DGWG )                                                                                                    (2020) 
  58      qShB4 (2020)          4                                                                    4.50 
  59      qSBR3.2               3     D311 or          219 RILs                                      3.3      Sheath blight                                            Yuan et al.  
                                      RM282            (LemontJ                 I                                                                                                          M 
                                                                   × Yangdao4 )                              resistance                                                (2019) 
                                                                                                                                                                                           . 
                                                                                                                                                                                             
  60      qSBR7.1               7     D709 or                                                        3.7                                                                                   J 
                                                                                                                                                                                           a 
                                                                                                                                                                                           m 
                                      D715 
                                                                                                                                                                                           a 
                                                                                                                                                                                           l 
  61      qSBR8.1               8     D804                                               SSR         1.8                                                                                   o 
                                                                                                                                                                                           d 
                                                                                                                                                                                           d 
                                                                                                                                                                                           i 
                                                                                                                                                                                           n 
                                                                                                                                                                                             
                                                                                                                                                                                           e 
                                                                                                                                                                                           t 
                                                                                                                                                                                             
                                                                                                                                                                                           a 
                                                                                                                                                                                           l 
                                                                                                                                                                                           . 

----------------------- Page 353-----------------------

                                                                                                                                                  M 
                                                                                                                                                  o 
                                                                                                                                                  l 
                             Linked                                  Type of         Associated                                                   e 
                                                                                                                                                  c 
                                                                                                                                                  u 
S. No. QTLs             Chr. markers       Mapping population        marker    LOD   character          Remarks                    Reference      l 
                                                                                                                                                  a 
                                                                                                                                                  r 
                                                                                                                                                    
62     qSBR9.2          9    D947 or                                           3.0                                                                A 
                                                                                                                                                  p 
                                                                                                                                                  p 
                             D948 
                                                                                                                                                  r 
                                                                                                                                                  o 
63     qSBR9.3          9    D949                                              2.4                                                                a 
                                                                                                                                                  c 
                                                                                                                                                  h 
64     qSBR12.1         12   D1211                                             2.3                                                                e 
                                                                                                                                                  s 
                                                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                  f 
65     qSBR12.2         12   D1239 or                                          3.6                                                                o 
                                                                                                                                                  r 
                                                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                  D 
                             D1246 
                                                                                                                                                  i 
                                                                                                                                                  s 
                                                                                                                                                  e 
                                                                                                                                                  a 
                                                                                                                                                  s 
                                                                                                                                                  e 
                                                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                  R 
                                                                                                                                                  e 
                                                                                                                                                  s 
                                                                                                                                                  i 
                                                                                                                                                  s 
                                                                                                                                                  t 
                                                                                                                                                  a 
                                                                                                                                                  n 
                                                                                                                                                  c 
                                                                                                                                                  e 
                                                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                  i 
                                                                                                                                                  n 
                                                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                  R 
                                                                                                                                                  i 
                                                                                                                                                  c 
                                                                                                                                                  e 

                                                                                                                                                   3 
                                                                                                                                                   4 
                                                                                                                                                   3 

----------------------- Page 354-----------------------

344                                                                                                     M. Jamaloddin et al. 

Fig. 2   Physical position of major biotic disease-resistance genes in rice. The chromosome left  
side indicates the location of genes and the right side shows the names of genes collected from the  
Q-TARO and Oryza base databases. The color indicates the genes related to various diseases such  
as bacterial leaf blight (red color) and blast (blue color), and green color indicates insect resis- 
tance in rice 

the pathogen races predominant in the region (Singh et al. 2001). Recent advances  
in DNA sequencing have made fine-mapping and characterization of the mapped  
genes easier, thus contributing significantly to the use of MAS for the development  
of resistant cultivars. The complete list of cloned genes was collected from Q-TARO  
(http://qtaro.abr.affrc.go.jp/)   and   OryGenesDB   (https://orygenesdb.cirad.fr/data. 
html) (Fig. 2). These genes were mainly associated with bacterial blight and blast  
resistance in rice. Interestingly, the regions on chromosomes 1, 4, and 5 were asso- 
ciated with multiple resistance genes, and these genes were colocalized in the same  
regions. These genomic regions play a major role in the resistance/tolerance mecha- 
nisms for diseases. To date, there are 46 BB R-genes mapped from different sources,  
out of which 29 are dominant, 12 are recessive, nine cloned, and nine fine-mapped  
(Chen et al. 2020). More than 100 R-genes (Pi) have been reported, and around 500  
QTLs were associated with blast resistance. However, only 25 Pi genes were cloned  
and characterized (Sharma et al. 2012; Ashkani et al. 2015). Several R QTLs were  
reported against bacterial leaf streak, but their study was limited to inheritance anal- 
ysis (He et al. 2012). 

4.1        MAS/MABB Foreground/Background Selection  

To address the limitations of conventional breeding, molecular breeding through  
MAS is among the most precise tools used to introgress multiple resistance genes  
into an elite varietal background at one time. Plant breeders were already successful  

----------------------- Page 355-----------------------

Molecular Approaches for Disease Resistance in Rice                                                              345 

in using this tool in developing resistant rice cultivars by deploying broad-spectrum  
multiple-R-genes with the help of MAS (Huang et al.  1997; Sanchez et al. 2000;  
Sundaram et al.  2008; Hari et al. 2013; Hajira et al. 2016; Balachiranjeevi et al.  
2018;  Swathi  et  al.  2019;  Jamaloddin  et  al.  2020).  In  marker-assisted  backcross  
breeding (MABB), a combination of foreground selection and background selection  
followed by continuous backcrossing can recover up to 99% of the recurrent parent  
genome (RPG) (Tanksley et al.  1989). In foreground selection, gene-linked mark- 
ers, or functional markers (SSRs, InDels, and SNPs), are applied to detect the asso- 
ciated R-genes in the target population at any stage of plant growth. In contrast,  
background  selection  applied  by  using  polymorphic  information  (SSRs,  SNPs)  
between the donor and recurrent parents can estimate RPG recovery in each back- 
cross generation at any plant growth stage (Singh et al. 2001). Recently, the Green  
Super Rice (GSR) breeding strategy proved that one backcross followed by selfing  
could  recover  more  than  90%  of  the  recurrent  parent  genome  (Balachiranjeevi  
et al. 2019). 

4.2      Pyramiding Disease-Resistance Genes  

Pyramiding of various biotic disease-resistance genes into a rice cultivar makes it a  
good candidate for breeders to introgress the resistance into locally adapted variet- 
ies that produce higher yield but are susceptible to diseases. The process of gene  
pyramiding  through  conventional  breeding  alone  becomes  difficult  because  the  
linkage  between  some  undesirable  traits  is  difficult  to  break  even  after  repeated  
backcrossing (Tanksley et al.  1989). Pyramiding of two or more resistance genes  
renders the phenotypic assessment of rice genotypes ineffective as distinguishing  
the  effect  of  each  individual  gene  precisely  becomes  difficult  since  each  gene  
imparts resistance to more than one race of the pathogen. Moreover, when a domi- 
nant and a recessive allele are present, the effect of the recessive gene is concealed.  
The availability of tightly linked markers for each of the resistance genes thus eases  
the recognition of plants with multiple genes. Initially, in rice, Huang et al. ( 1997)  
successfully  introgressed  four  major  BB  resistance  genes  (Xa4 , Xa5 , Xa13 ,  and  
Xa21)  and  developed  breeding  lines  with  combinations  of  two,  three,  and  four  
genes. In an extension of this work, several research institutions in India and other  
countries have studied the effectiveness of the pyramided genes against BB disease,  
to which most of the popular varieties were susceptible. This research has opened  
the  gates  in  India  to  address  the  susceptibility  of  popular  rice  varieties  such  as  
PR106 (Singh et al. 2001), Pusa Basmati-1 (Joseph et al. 2004), and Samba Mahsuri  
(Sundaram et al. 2008) by pyramiding the BB R-genes (xa5, xa13, and Xa21) in the  
initial phase of improvement. Later, the improvement of popular rice varieties and  
parental  lines  continued  mainly  against  BB  (Xa21 , Xa23 , xa5, xa13, Xa4 , Xa7 ,  
Xa33 , and Xa38) and blast disease (Pi genes  Pi2, Pi9, Pi40, Pi54, Piz, and Pi1)  
separately or by combining R-genes for both diseases (Gopalakrishnan et al. 2008;  
Sundaram et al. 2009; Hari et al. 2013; Balachiranjeevi et al. 2015; Yugander et al.  

----------------------- Page 356-----------------------

346                                                                                             M. Jamaloddin et al. 

2018; Rekha et al. 2018; Swathi et al. 2019; Jamaloddin et al. 2020). The possibility  
of recombination between the gene of interest and the linked marker has led to the  
selection of false-positive rice genotypes in the marker-assisted selection process,  
which could be overcome by using gene-specific functional markers (Ingvardsen  
et al. 2008). Many genetic markers, also called functional markers, have been iden- 
tified for different disease-resistance genes in rice, such as BB-resistance genes xa5  
(Iyer-Pascuzzi and McCouch 2007), xa13 (Chu et al. 2006), and Xa21 (Song et al.  
 1995). The gene-pyramided lines enable the conducting of quantitative analysis to  
assess the effect of each gene and interactions between them and, most importantly,  
enhancing the performance, stability, and longevity of genetic resistance. 

4.3        Varieties Improved and Developed 

Highly accepted varieties and parental lines were improved against multiple dis- 
eases through MAS. For the first time, Huang et al. ( 1997) developed lines pyra- 
mided  with  two,  three,  and  four  genes  through  MAS  and  tested  their  resistance  
against BB. The resistance levels of introgressed lines showed an elevated resis- 
tance  compared  with  lines  containing  a  single  gene.  Later,  Singh  et  al.  (2001)  
improved Indian rice cultivar PR106 against BB through MAS by pyramiding xa5,  
xa13, and Xa21 genes, followed by Joseph et al. (2004), who improved popular  
basmati variety Pusa Basmati-1, and Sundaram et al. (2008) improved popular vari- 
ety Samba Mahsuri for BB and reported more than 95% RPG recovery through  
MABB. Through MAS, three blast genes (Pi1, Pi2, and Pi33) were introduced in  
the  background  of  popular  Russian  rice  variety  Kuboyar. The  improved  lines  of  
Kuboyar  were  used  to  develop  blast-resistant  hybrids  by  using  them  as  hybrid  
parental lines. Similarly, Hari et al. (2011) improved restorer line KMR3R for resis- 
tance against BB by transferring the Xa21 gene along with Rf3 and Rf4 (restorer of  
fertility) genes through MABB. Balachiranjeevi et al. (2015) imparted resistance to  
a maintainer line (DRR17B) by introgressing Xa21 and Pi54 genes against BB and  
blast disease, respectively. 

4.4       Multiple Disease-Resistance Breeding Strategies  

In breeding for disease resistance, multiple methodologies such as pedigree, modi- 
fied bulk, single seed descent (SSD), doubled-haploid (DH), and MAB have been  
used to develop resistant rice varieties (Mackill et al.  1996; Khush 2005; Collard  
et al. 2013). In addition to these strategies, the GSR breeding program was one of  
the successful strategies that involved vigorous phenotypic screening at early back- 
cross stages (BC F  to BC F ) combined with three successive rounds of stringent 1 2 1 4 
selection for the best plant type to come up with climate-resilient rice varieties. This  
strategy could develop homozygous inbred cultivars within a short span of 4–5 years  

----------------------- Page 357-----------------------

Molecular Approaches for Disease Resistance in Rice                                          347 

vis-à-vis 9–10 years with a conventional breeding program (Yu et al.  2020). The  
GSR breeding strategy is carried out in three steps. The first is to develop early  
backcross BC F  populations by crossing a widely adapted recipient variety with a 1 2 
diverse set of donors. Second is to simultaneously do phenotypic screening of early  
backcross-derived lines of BC F , BC F , and BC F  generations under the different 1 2 1 3 1 4 
abiotic and biotic stress conditions in a rigorous manner to identify and select intro- 
gression lines (ILs) tolerant of different stresses as compared to the tolerant and  
susceptible checks. The third step is the mapping of genomic regions influenced by  
particular climate fluctuations and their characterization to decode the molecular  
and physiological basis of the identified genomic regions (Ali et al. 2017). Three  
rounds  of  screening  of  populations  from  BC F   to  BC F   for  different  diseases 1 2 1 4 
simultaneously could help in the development of varieties with tolerance of multiple  
biotic stresses. The GSR breeding strategy led to successful mapping of the Xa39  
gene and deploying it in the background of Huang-Hua-Zhang (Zhang et al. 2015).  
Further, through the designed QTL pyramiding approach, one could combine selec- 
tive ILs carrying different biotic and abiotic stress-tolerance genes/QTLs derived  
from different donors but having a common recipient parent. Similar to the GSR  
breeding  program,  breeders  have  simultaneously  pyramided  multiple  disease-  
resistance genes (BB + blast) with different combinations such as  Xa21 +  Pi54,  
Xa21 + Pi54 + Pi2, and xa5 + xa13 + Xa21 + Pi54 + Pi2 into the background of an  
elite cultivar by employing MAS and MABB (Jiang et al. 2015; Jamaloddin et al.  
2020). Recently, one of the successful breeding strategies (the GSR breeding pro- 
gram) revealed lots of hidden genetic diversity for disease resistance through MAS  
and also proved that RPG recovery could surpass 90% with one backcross followed  
by selfing (Balachiranjeevi et al.  2019). Furthermore, Feng et al. (2018) reported  
that pyramiding the detected QTLs effectively broadened the genetic base. Research  
is being extended to dissect the detected QTLs in order to identify candidate genes  
through functional validation using a map-based cloning approach. 

5     Molecular Mechanisms of Disease Resistance 

A wide variety of pathogens, including bacteria, fungi, and viruses, attacks crop  
plants. Either a pathogen can successfully invade, leading to the development of  
disease, or the plant can resist the pathogen using an active or passive form of resis- 
tance. Different strategies have been developed by various pathogens to enter, infect,  
and reproduce in plants. Pathogens are mainly classified as necrotrophs and bio- 
trophs based on the method they use to invade, infect, and attack a plant (Oliver and  
Ipcho 2004). Necrotrophic pathogens kill the host-plant tissue soon after they estab- 
lish infection and then develop and feed on the dead tissue. Unlike these, biotrophic  
pathogens require a live-host tissue for their growth and reproduction. 
    Specific  defense  mechanisms  work  effectively  against  biotrophs  through  a  
hypersensitive response developed by rapid local cell death surrounding infection,  
and this serves to hinder the growth and invasion of pathogens into other plant parts.  

----------------------- Page 358-----------------------

348                                                                         M. Jamaloddin et al. 

This mechanism arises when the first level of the defense mechanism is breached by  
the pathogen (Zipfel and Felix  2005). Usually, most pathogens that infect plants,  
such as fungi, harbor secretory proteins, which disrupt these barriers (Serrano et al.  
2014). After the entry of the pathogen into the host cell, it is recognized by special  
molecules  called  microbe-/pathogen-associated  molecular  patterns  (MAMPs  or  
PAMPs), which include ergosterol, peptidoglycan, lipopolysaccharide, and bacte- 
rial flagella in proteins. The innate immune system recognizes these proteins with  
the  help  of  host  plasma  membrane-bound  receptors  called  pattern  recognition  
receptors  (PRRs)  to  further  obstruct  the  growth  of  infection,  providing  MAMP-  
triggered immunity (MTI). PRRs also detect molecules that become released in the  
host  when  the  pathogens  cause  damage  (damage-associated  molecular  patterns,  
DAMPs). The binding of these components also triggers pattern-triggered immu- 
nity (PTI) and downstream defense responses (Tena et al. 2011). Overall, the recog- 
nition of PAMP/MAMP or DAMP results in the activation of PTI, triggering the  
production  of  different  reactive  oxygen  species  (ROS),  initiation  of  mitogen-  
activated protein (MAP) kinase activity, and various transcription factor activation,  
thus limiting the spread of pathogens completely (Nürnberger and Kemmerling 2009). 
    The widely accepted model of plant disease resistance is explained by a two-  
level innate immune system. The two levels include PTI, which is usually a weak,  
basal, and generic immune response, and the other is effector-triggered immunity  
(ETI), which is a potent response and is specific to the pathogen in question (Jones  
and Dangl 2006). PTI is mediated by the PRRs that recognize molecular patterns  
associated with the pathogens or the resulting damage products (PAMPs or DAMPs).  
On the other hand, ETI includes recognition of a pathogen-specific factor and results  
in a severe and rapid form of immune response leading to localized cell death (also  
known as a hypersensitive response or HR) to hinder the pathogen from spreading  
any further. ETI is achieved by a gene-to-gene interaction and is thus specific to the  
race of the pathogen. While PRRs mediate PTI, ETI is mediated by specific genes  
that  belong  to  the  nucleotide-binding-leucine-rich  repeat  (NB-LRR)  domain-  
containing proteins, otherwise called resistance (R) genes. The recognition of cog- 
nate  ligands  results  in  activation  of  signaling  events  that  in  turn  results  in  the  
generation of different forms of immune response such as callose and lignin deposi- 
tion, production of antimicrobial compounds, induction of cell death, changes in  
primary  and  secondary  metabolic  flux,  and  synthesis  of  secondary  metabolites  
depending on the type of elicitors. Other classifications of genes involved in disease  
resistance include major resistance (MR) genes and defense-related genes (DR),  
whose roles cannot be explained by the definition of PTI- and ETI-associated genes  
(Ke et al.  2017). PTI is considered to be quantitative in nature, that is, multiple  
genes function together to achieve immunity, also known as a QTL. ETI against a  
pathogen strain is controlled by a single gene and is specific only to those strains  
that contain the cognate avirulence (Avr) protein that the R-gene recognizes, thus  
leading  to  a  qualitative  resistance.  Studies  in  the  past  few  decades  established  a  
framework of how the resistance mechanisms act using model pathosystems. Along  
this line, rice resistance to its major pathogens such as Xanthomonas oryzae ssp.,  
Magnaporthe  oryzae,  and  Rhizoctonia  solani  has  been  studied  to  a  reasonable  

----------------------- Page 359-----------------------

Molecular Approaches for Disease Resistance in Rice                                                            349 

extent. However, rice resistance to other pathogens still needs more investigation to  
come to a consensus. This section summarizes the established mechanisms of dis- 
ease resistance in rice. 
    Plant resistance is dictated by the type of resistance genes and a network of sig- 
naling pathways (Chisholm et al. 2006). Broadly, the plant defense system can be  
categorized into two classes: basal defense and specific defense. The basal defense  
system is much more effective against necrotrophic pathogens (Singh et al. 2018).  
Elicitors are molecules that induce a plant defense response at very low concentra- 
tions (Thakur and Sohal 2013). The role of the basal defense system is to check the  
entry of pathogens and provide immunity at the starting stage of infection. This  
                                                                                                         2+     + 
defense response involves membrane permeability, activating ion fluxes (Ca                                  , K ,  
   + 
H ),  generating  ROS,  producing  nitric  oxide  (NO),  and  phosphorylation/dephos- 
phorylation of proteins by protein kinases and phosphatases. It also includes the  
production of signaling molecules such as jasmonic acid (JA), salycilic acid (SA),  
and  ethylene  (ET). These  proteins  are  characteristic  players  in  the  regulation  of  
defense signal transduction cascades. These steps further trigger an array of signal- 
ing that leads to the regulation of the expression of defense-related genes and the  
stimulation of defense responses. These responses include cell-wall strengthening  
(callose and lignin deposition), phytoalexin synthesis, and activation of kinase cas- 
cades escorted by a hypersensitive response (Jones and Dangl 2006). 

5.1      Resistance to Bacterial Blight  

To date, 46 resistance genes have been identified to confer resistance to Xoo in rice.  
Among them, 11 genes were cloned and functionally characterized. Some of the  
resistance genes are quantitative in nature, whereas others confer qualitative resis- 
tance (Ke et al. 2017; Jiang et al. 2020; Chen et al. 2020). The 11 cloned genes fall  
under different classes of resistance genes: LRR-RLKs (leucine-rich repeat receptor-  
like kinases), NB-LRR, a wall-associated kinase, executor R proteins, SWEET (sug- 
ars will eventually be exported transporters) genes, and a transcription factor gamma  
subunit protein. Three of the cloned resistance genes, Xa3/Xa26 , Xa4 , and Xa21 ,  
code for kinases. Xa4 is a wall-associated kinase (Ke et al. 2017; Jiang et al. 2020)  
that  provides  resistance  to  certain  races  of  Xoo  through  cell-wall  reinforcement.  
Xa3/Xa26  and  Xa21  are  LRR-RLKs  that  recognize  Xoo-associated  molecules  
AvrXa3  and  sulphated  RaxX,  respectively.  Xa21-  and Xa3/Xa26-mediated  resis- 
tance has been found to be positively regulated by OsSERK2 (rice somatic embryo- 
genesis receptor kinase 2). Nine genes were found to be regulating Xa21-mediated  
resistance positively or negatively. Xa4-mediated resistance leads to the accumula- 
tion of phytoalexins. Xa1 , an NB-LRR, recognizes intact transcription activation-  
like effectors (TALEs) from Xoo and thus leads to resistance. SWEET genes code  
for  sugar  transporters  and  were  identified  to  be  targets  of  different  Xoo TALEs,  
thereby acting as susceptibility factors. Natural polymorphisms were identified in  
the  promoters  of  three  SWEET  genes,  OsSWEET11/Os8N3/xa13,  OsSWEET13/ 

----------------------- Page 360-----------------------

350                                                                                                  M. Jamaloddin et al. 

xa25, and  OsSWEET14/Os11N3/xa41, which promote their induction by cognate  
TALEs,  thus  providing  recessive  resistance.  Genes,  including  Xa10 ,  Xa23 ,  and  
Xa27 , are classified as executor R-genes as the expression of the respective resis- 
tance alleles is induced by Xoo TALEs. These genes are characterized by the pres- 
ence  of  multiple  potential  transmembrane  domains  whose  expression  induction  
results in HR and thus resistance to Xoo . Another recessive resistance gene, xa5,  
codes for transcription factor IIA gamma subunit 5 (TFIIAγ5) with valine to gluta- 
mine mutation in the 39th position. The susceptible allele, Xa5 , is hijacked by the  
TALEs to induce the expression of other host susceptibility genes. The mutation  
disrupts the ability of TALEs to bind to TFIIAγ5, thus leading to resistance (Ke  
et al. 2017; Jiang et al. 2020). 

5.2       Resistance to Bacterial Leaf Streak  

To date, no major BLS-resistance genes have been identified. However, the xa5  
gene was mapped to be a major resistance QTL for Xoc resistance. It was previ- 
ously  observed  that  TALEs  from  Xoc  also  hijack  TFIIAγ5  for  inducing  host  
susceptibility genes. In another study, Xo1 , a resistance locus in an American  
rice variety, was identified to be responsible for resistance to African Xoc strains  
but not to Asian strains. Xa21 was identified to provide weak resistance to Xoc  
through the recognition of Ax21, a quorum-sensing molecule produced by Xoc  
(Jiang  et  al.  2020).  Three  major  broad-spectrum  resistance  QTLs,  qXO-2-1,  
qXO-4-1, and  qXO-11-2, were identified to confer resistance to Xoo and  Xoc  
(Bossa-Castro et al. 2018). 

5.3       Resistance to Rice Blast  

More than 100 resistance genes and 500 QTLs are known to be associated with  
blast resistance in rice. However, to date, only 25 genes have been cloned (Li  
et al. 2019b). These 25 cloned R-genes are called Pi genes. Of the 25 Pi genes,  
22 encode NB-LRR family proteins. A majority of these R-genes trigger ETI,  
thus leading to qualitative or race-specific resistance. So far, seven R-genes have  
been  identified  to  confer  broad-spectrum  resistance  to  blast:  Pi7,  Pi9,  Pi21,  
Pi50, Pi57, Pigm, and Ptr . Apart from canonical R-genes, so far, five defense- 
related  genes  were  also  shown  to  confer  resistance  to  blast:  bsr-d1,  bsr-k1,  
spl11, spl33, and OsBBI1, Pi9, Pi50, Pigm, Ptr, and OsBBI1 are dominant resis- 
tance genes or positive regulators of blast resistance, whereas the rest of them  
are recessive resistance genes, in other words, their wild-type alleles negatively  
regulate blast resistance (Li et al. 2019b). 

----------------------- Page 361-----------------------

Molecular Approaches for Disease Resistance in Rice                                                                        351 

5.4       Resistance to Sheath Blight  

Information  on  the  mechanisms  that  govern  ShB  resistance  in  rice  is  just  being  
uncovered. There are no reports on a single resistance gene that confers resistance  
to ShB. However, many QTLs have been identified to be associated with ShB resis- 
tance. Most of the QTLs were reported to provide a minor contribution to the resis- 
tance  phenotype,  whereas  two  QTLs  (qShB9-2  and  qShB11-1)  were  found  to  
contribute more than 10% to ShB resistance. Sequence analyses revealed the pres- 
ence of various defense-associated genes in these QTLs. qShB9-2 was identified in  
many rice varieties that exhibit resistance to ShB. It was observed that  qShB9-2  
contains a β-1,3-glucanase, OsWAK91, and 12 other possible candidate genes. On  
the other hand, the  qShB11-1 interval was shown to have receptor-like kinases, a  
lipase, and a tandem array of 11 chitinase genes. Tens of minor QTLs were found to  
be associated with ShB resistance. Nevertheless, no information is available on the  
gene(s) responsible for the resistance. Studies using resistant cultivars shed light on  
the possible mechanisms by which rice fights Rhizoctonia solani. Various studies  
showed changes in metabolic pathways, including primary and secondary metabo- 
lites. Intermediates of glycolysis and tricarboxylic acid cycle were found to be accu- 
mulated  in  rice  post  R.solani  infection,  indicating  the  possible  involvement  of  
primary metabolism in response to the pathogen. Also, the accumulation of second- 
ary metabolites such as phytoalexins, chlorogenic acid, polyphenols, and flavonoids  
was reported to be higher in the tolerant varieties than in the susceptible varieties  
postchitin treatment (Molla et al.  2020). ROS deregulation has been observed to  
delay pathogen colonization in resistant cultivars (Oreiro et al. 2019). 

5.5       Broad-Spectrum Resistance Genes  

From a breeder’s point of view, a single locus/gene is more preferred as it would  
permit easier introgression. Many defense-related genes have been identified to pro- 
vide broad-spectrum resistance to either multiple races of a pathogen (vertical resis- 
tance) or multiple pathogens altogether (horizontal resistance). Such responses are  
quantitative in nature and hence can be highly durable and practical to keep infec- 
tious diseases at bay. Several previous studies have been reported that the expres- 
sion  of  defense-response  genes  (DR  genes)  such  as  rice  germin-like  proteins  
(OsGLP) or a class of DR genes present in a QTL along with R genes is also most  
probably associated with rice resistance, as knockdown of these genes escalated the  
susceptibility  against  two  major  rice  fungal  diseases,  blast  and  sheath  blight  
(Manosalva et al. 2009). OsPAL4 is reported to impart broad-spectrum resistance to  
rice (Tonnessen et al. 2015). A LysM receptor-like kinase (RLS), OsCERK1, regu- 
lates cytoplasmic OsRLCK176 and  OsRLCK185 recognizes chitin and peptidogly- 
cans activating immune signaling pathways in rice against blast and bacterial blight  
diseases. OsSERK1, OsWAK25, OsWRKY45-1, OsWRKY45-2, OsWRKY13, OsDR8,  

----------------------- Page 362-----------------------

352                                                                      M. Jamaloddin et al. 

OsMPK6, OsPAL4, OsNH1, OsLYP4, OsBSR1, and OSK35 have all been shown to  
regulate resistance to bacterial blight and rice blast positively. OsPAD4 and OsPAL4  
positively regulate resistance to ShB, whereas OsWAK25 negatively regulates ShB  
resistance (Ke et al.  2017). These genes, although identified in different studies,  
play  a  highly  connected  role  in  helping  rice  fight  the  invading  pathogens.  More  
comprehensive studies are needed to link the dots to construct a complete map of  
rice resistance to diseases. 

6     Impact of Major Nutrient Fertilizers on Biotic Disease  
     Resistance in Rice 

The rapidly increasing world population requires a sustainable nutritional global  
food supply, which is a significant concern for crop production. Changing climatic  
scenarios and decreasing natural resources suggest that there is a need to intensify  
agricultural production using an efficient agronomic nutrient management (ANM)  
system.  Following  efficient ANM  technologies  can  enable  us  to  understand  and  
mitigate the adverse impacts of stress, inadequate soil fertility status, pathogens,  
and pests (Dordas 2008). 
   Several efficient screening technologies exist, such as smart water irrigation sys- 
tems, integrated fertilizer applications, and disease biocontrol strategies, that have  
been developed and adopted in different ecosystems to control various diseases in  
rice (Bargaz et al.  2018). Among these, the rate of fertilizer used, judicious and  
timely applications of nutrients, and availability of these nutrients play a crucial role  
in plant growth and also in developing defense mechanisms against various pests  
and diseases (Fageria et al.  2008; Sun et al. 2020). The management of nutrient  
statuses in the soil, especially nitrogen (N), phosphorus (P), and potassium (K), is  
an eco-friendly strategy to control different biotic stresses instead of frequent appli- 
cation of pesticides. Globally, the efficiency of fertilizer use by the crop and the  
correct rates of fertilizer applications are poorly studied. Earlier studies have indi- 
cated that only 30–35% of N, 10–25% of P, and 35–50% of K are taken up by plants.  
Particularly in China, the amount of fertilizer used has increased drastically from  
270 to 350 kg/ha, which is more than 75% of the global average of fertilizer applica- 
tion. This excessive amount of N fertilizer leads to leaching, which is a significant  
cause of groundwater pollution and degradation of soil quality (Teng et al. 2016). 
   Developing  sustainable  agriculture  is  one  of  the  major  strategies  to  increase  
global rice production. Application of nutrient fertilizer at the right rate and stage  
and also microorganisms are the key factors in disease control. The essential nutri- 
ent elements can decrease disease severity but also increase the severity of disease  
incidence (Dordas 2008). Nitrogen is one of the key elements for plant growth and  
development, which are involved in the major physiological and metabolic path- 
ways related to N assimilation (Bolton and Thomma 2008; Mur et al. 2017). Plenty  
of research has been conducted on the role of N and its interaction with disease  

----------------------- Page 363-----------------------

Molecular Approaches for Disease Resistance in Rice                                          353 

resistance and the results are inconsistent, with a poor understanding of the resis- 
tance mechanisms in physiological and metabolic pathways. These differences may  
be due to various stress signaling mechanisms caused by the different forms of N  
(NH4+ and NO3−), the type of pathogen specificity, and the stage of N application  

(Dordas 2008). However, several researchers have suggested that the correct time  
application  of  fertilizers  has  been  significantly  increasing  disease  resistance  and  
decreasing the use of fungicides (Anderson 2002; Hervieux et al. 2002; Bhat et al.  
2013). Recently, Sun et al. (2020) reviewed N applications and their critical role in  
the defense mechanisms in various diseases such as blast, downy mildew, stem rot,  
powdery mildew, leaf rust, stem rust, and rice blast diseases in plants. Balancing of  
these nutrients is imperative to understand the cellular structure and composition,  
which mainly affect plant defense mechanisms. For instance, high rates of N appli- 
cation lead to a significant impact on susceptibility by decreasing the thickness of  
cell-wall components (cellulose and lignin), whereas decreasing N applications lead  
to an increase in lodging resistance by changes in stem lignification and secondary  
cell-wall synthesis (Zhang et al. 2017b; Sun et al. 2018). Also, decreasing N fertil- 
izer  significantly  increases  the  incidence  of  major  insect  pests,  including  brown  
planthopper,  leaffolder,  and  stem  borer,  the  key  insect  pests  in  the  major  rice-  
growing areas in Asian countries (Lu et al. 2007). Some reports have suggested that  
N  applications  significantly  influence  the  size  of  leaf  blast  lesions  (Matsuyama  
1973; Kaur et al.  1979). Sime et al. (2017) studied the different rates of nutrient  
fertilizer application and their relation to blast disease. The combination of NPK  
(20-10-10) at a rate of 200 kg/ha has a remarkable impact on decreasing blast dis- 
ease in all phases of plant growth. Similarly, Reddy et al. ( 1979) reported an optimal  
rate of N application (76 kg/ha) to maximize grain yield and also minimize disease.  
One of the major diseases is bacterial leaf blight of rice, caused by Xanthomonas  
oryzae, which increased significantly when a higher amount of N fertilizer (>100 kg/ 
ha) was applied, and yield decreased. Begum et al. (2011) reported that a balanced  
application of nutrient fertilizers, including K, significantly decreased the percent- 
age of BLB. The application of K fertilizer has dramatically decreased the intensity  
of various infectious diseases such as BLB, sheath blight, and stem rot in rice, and  
also in other cereal crops (Sharma et al. 2005a). Decreasing BLB severity by apply- 
ing K topdressing is a viable approach just before disease-occurring stages and this  
makes it possible to maximize grain yield and have lesser disease development. 
    Using slag-based silicon (Si) fertilizer in rice fields is an alternative approach to  
control the major disease brown spot, which is caused by the fungus Bipolaris ory- 
zae. This disease causes significant yield losses, mainly in tropical and subtropical  
areas, where the frequent occurrences of heavy rainfall and high temperature are the  
main factors in decreasing the Si content in highly weathered soils (Raven 2003).  
The major role of these Si applications is to mediate resistance mechanisms through  
the physiological and metabolic pathways that can lead to creating more pronounced  
cell silicification in rice leaves, and the strong leaf epidermal surface might increase  
the resistance to fungal penetration (Hayasaka et al.  2008; Sun et al. 2010; Ning  
et al. 2014). These Si fertilizers provided clear evidence showing the importance of  
increasing  the  thickness  of  the  silicon  layer  in  the  epidermal  cell  walls  that  are  

----------------------- Page 364-----------------------

354                                                                     M. Jamaloddin et al. 

supposed to be the main site for conferring resistance to brown spot disease in rice.  
Interestingly, Wu et al. (2017) experimented with the transcriptional responses in  
two different nutrient fertilizers, Si and N concentrations, and their relation to BPH  
infestation. These two elements had a trade-off mechanism in terms of resistance.  
The interaction of these two elements clearly showed decreases in the expression of  
Si  transporters  such  as  OsLsi1  and  OsLsi2  under  high  rates  of  N  application,  
whereas,  in  the  N  transporters  OsNRT1:1,  OsGS2,  OsFd-GOGAT,  OsNADH-  
GOGAT2, and OsGDH2, expression increased under a high rate of Si fertilizer. This  
demonstrated that N and Si had antagonistic interactions in rice (Wu et al. 2017).  
Similarly, Robichaux (2001) identified a significant decrease in the major disease  
sheath blight, caused by the fungal pathogen Rhizoctonia solani, by adding calcium  
silicate in greenhouse and field conditions. Rice grain yield is increased by almost  
13% from the use of a calcium silicate application rate of 3.3 mg/ha and also a sig- 
nificant decrease in ShB in different soil types. These results have proven that Si  
fertilizer can diminish fungal disease severity by increasing the Si concentration in  
rice leaves and boosting grain yield. 

7     Genome-Editing Tools for Improving Disease Resistance 

Diseases cause a considerable yield loss annually (Heinrichs and Muniappan 2017;  
Mushtaq et al. 2019). Breeding for disease resistance has been pursued for a long  
time. The traditional practice is to introgress disease resistance into elite cultivars  
through  breeding  techniques. Although  a  successful  method,  it  has  its  downside  
(Zafar et al.  2020). The traditional way is time-, labor-, and resource-consuming  
(Romero and Gatica-Arias 2019). With the arrival of the genomics era, identifying  
disease-resistance genes has become highly efficient, and resistance alleles can be  
identified at a single base resolution. With such a massive potential in hand and  
constant improvement in various genome-editing (GE) tools such as site-specific  
mutagenesis  (SSM),  meganucleases  (MNs),  zinc-finger  nucleases  (ZFNs),  tran- 
scription activator-like effector nucleases (TALENs), and clustered regularly inter- 
spaced short palindromic repeat (CRISPR)/CRISPR-associated protein (CRISPR/ 
Cas), this has opened a novel path to achieve the improvement of disease resistance  
in various crops (Zhang et al. 2017a; Mishra et al. 2018; Zafar et al. 2020). Recently,  
several researchers have reviewed the various GE tool applications and their limita- 
tions in target gene specificity and accuracy (Abdallah et al.  2015; Mishra et al.  
2018; Zafar et al. 2020). As compared with SSM, MNs, and ZFNs, the most widely  
used GE tools such as TALENs and the CRISPR/Cas system have a versatile, fast,  
and relatively efficient GE method. Over the past several years, these two methods  
have transformed the field of genome engineering, and they can easily edit and also  
recognize specific genomic regions (Gaj et al. 2016). These methods have a signifi- 
cant impact on the genomic revolution that has accelerated the discovery of novel  
sequence variations and breakthroughs in the scientific knowledge to demonstrate  
the  power  of  these  GE  tools  in  establishing  resistance  to  pathogens  in  various  

----------------------- Page 365-----------------------

Molecular Approaches for Disease Resistance in Rice                                    355 

diseases. The rapid progress in the CRISPR-Cas9 system makes it a highly accurate  
and efficient method that can edit in multiple genes at multiple locations using a  
single molecular construct (Cong et al. 2013). 

7.1     Site-Specific Mutagenesis: The Path So Far 

Site-specific  mutagenesis  is  achieved  by  deploying  a  class  of  enzymes  called  
“nucleases”  fused  with  DNA-binding  motifs  to  target  specific  sequences  in  the  
genome. The activity of nuclease results in double-strand breaks at the target site,  
which are then repaired by the host DNA repair mechanisms via nonhomologous  
end joining (NHEJ) or homologous recombination (Feng et al. 2013). During this  
process, small insertions or deletions occur in the genome, thus disrupting the gene  
sequence (Mishra et al. 2018). SSM is an evolving area of research with newer tools  
often emerging with improved precision and efficiency. 

7.1.1    Meganucleases 

Meganucleases (MNs) are endonucleases (enzymes that cut within a strand) that  
occur naturally and possess sequence-specific DNA-binding and nuclease activities.  
The application of MNs for site-targeted mutagenesis began in the 1980s. Owing to  
the recognition of long DNA sequences (18–40 bp), MNs were a good choice. On  
the other hand, the number of naturally occurring MNs was limited, thus diminish- 
ing their wider application. Moreover, custom modification of MNs is a viable but  
expensive option (Abdallah et al. 2015). 

7.1.2    Zinc-Finger Nucleases and TALENs 

Zinc-finger  nucleases  (ZFNs)  kick-started  the  wider  application  of  site-specific  
mutagenesis in 1996 (Kim et al.  1996). The zinc-finger motif is one of the most  
copious DNA-binding motifs present in eukaryotes (Klug and Schwabe 1995). Each  
ZF motif recognizes a specific 3-bp sequence in the major groove of DNA. Thus,  
tandemly placing multiple ZF motifs of different base specificity and fusing them to  
a nuclease can result in the generation of a molecular scissor that can precisely cut  
the target site. Modular assembly-based methods enabled the construction of ZFNs  
that can virtually target any DNA sequence (Gaj et al. 2013). However, limitations  
of using ZFNs exist. The modular assembly is a complex and expensive process that  
requires  many  optimizations.  Off-target  cleavage  is  another  challenge  that  many  
SSM techniques face (Ramirez et al. 2008; Gupta and Musunuru 2014). 
   Transcription activator-like effectors (TALEs) are proteins that naturally occur in  
the genus Xanthomonas , which predominantly consists of phytopathogenic bacteria  
(Boch  et  al.  2009;  Moscou  and  Bogdanove  2009).  TALEs  are  employed  by  

----------------------- Page 366-----------------------

356                                                                     M. Jamaloddin et al. 

Xanthomonas oryzae pv. Oryzae (Xoo) to target and activate the expression of spe- 
cific host genes to increase the susceptibility of the host. The specific binding to  
DNA is achieved by a 33–35-amino-acid-long tandem repeat domain, each of which  
targets a specific base. The base specificity is conferred by the amino acids that are  
located in the 12th and 13th positions of the series. These positions are called repeat  
variable di-residues (RVDs) (Boch et al. 2009; Moscou and Bogdanove 2009; Gaj  
et al. 2013; Abdallah et al. 2015). Exploiting this brought in a revolution in the field  
of genome editing called TALENs. TALENs are TALE nucleases wherein the DNA-  
binding motif of a TALE is fused with a catalytic domain of a nuclease, thus allow- 
ing the domain to target and cleave a specific sequence in the genome. By modifying  
the RVDs, one could define the target site and thus assemble a custom TALEN to  
target any region of interest in the genome (Christian et al. 2010; Boch 2011). The  
design and delivery of TALENs, however, pose a setback for the technique owing to  
their large size (Abdallah et al. 2015). 

7.1.3    CRISPR-Based Genome Editing 

Clustered regularly interspaced short palindromic repeats (CRISPR) and CRISPR-  
associated (Cas), collectively called CRISPR-Cas, is a microbial adaptive immune  
strategy that works based on an RNA-guided nuclease complex to cleave foreign  
genetic elements. A CRISPR-Cas locus is a cluster of Cas genes, noncoding RNA,  
and  an  array  of  repetitive  elements. The  repeated  elements  are  interspaced  with  
protospacers  (short  variable  repeats  that  are  derived  from  foreign  DNA  targets).  
Together,  the  noncoding  RNA  and  protospacers  constitute  the  CRISPR  RNA  
(crRNA). Each protospacer is associated with a protospacer adjacent motif (PAM)  
that differs between the types of CRISPR systems. Depending on the organization  
and composition of the nuclease genes, the CRISPR-Cas system is classified into  
Class I and Class II. Each class has three types of CRISPR-Cas system each. The  
Class I CRISPR system is less used owing to its limited knowledge and associated  
complexities. The Class II system, on the other hand, is a well-characterized and  
highly used genome-editing system. Class II is further subclassified into three types  
(types II, V, and VI) based on the specificities for nucleotide substrates, PAM, and  
the Cas genes that affect the substrate cleavage (Koonin and Makarova 2019; Moon  
et al. 2019). A brief overview is discussed below. 
   CRISPR-Cas9 from Streptomyces pyogenes is the founding system for CRISPR-  
based genome editing, which is economical, easier, and more efficient. Cas9 is an  
RNA-guided nuclease that causes double-strand breaks in the genomic region that  
is  complementary  to  the  crRNA  provided  that  the  3′  of  the  DNA  sequence  is  
5′-NGG-3′  (G-rich  PAM).  In  addition,  the  CRISPR-Cas9  system  needs  a  trans-  
acting crRNA (tracrRNA) to be functional (Deltcheva et al. 2011; Jinek et al. 2012).  
Cas9 proteins of different bacterial origins have different PAM specificities, spacer  
lengths, and sizes. Improvements in the techniques made it possible to multiplex  
genome  editing  with  the  use  of  polycistronic  tRNA-gRNA  (PTG),  wherein  the  
tRNA processing system is used to construct a tandem array of tRNA and gRNA  

----------------------- Page 367-----------------------

Molecular Approaches for Disease Resistance in Rice                                                                357 

(attached to the spacer), which would be transcribed as a full primary transcript that  
is later processed and cleaved to release individual single-guide RNAs (sgRNAs),  
each of which targets a unique region in the genome (Zafar et al. 2020). 
    Cpf1, also known as Cas12a, belongs to the type V CRISPR-Cas system. Unlike  
Cas9, Cas12a does not need tracrRNA for the complex to be functional and it rec- 
ognizes a 5′ T-rich PAM sequence (5′-TTTN-3′ or 5′-TTN-3′) (Zetsche et al. 2015).  
Also, Cpf1 exhibits RNase activity that can cleave pre-crRNAs to mature crRNA,  
thus enabling the possibility of including multiple crRNAs in a single cassette. Cpf1  
allows the use of longer gRNAs of up to 100 nt (Zetsche et al. 2015; Mishra et al.  
2018). This system is gaining usage because of its higher specificity and enhanced  
efficiency. Advances are made in terms of increasing the range of targets by engi- 
neering the complex to target other PAMs. 
    Base editing can be used to modify single bases in the genome, thus opening an  
avenue to increase the allelic diversity of the genes and also to create specific muta- 
tions to alter a gene function. The use of the CRISPR-Cas system achieves this in  
conjunction with base-modifying enzymes such as cytidine deaminase (to induce  
C:G to A:T mutations) or adenine deaminase (to induce A:T to G:C mutations).  
Base-editing techniques eliminate the need for double-strand breaks and thus the  
activation of DNA repair pathways (Lu and Zhu 2017; Hao et al. 2019). 
    Gene knock-in thus far required double-strand breaks and activation of homology-  
directed repair (HDR), which uses a donor template (carrying the gene copy to be  
knocked-in) to incorporate the new copy in the genome. This technique is extremely  
limited  because  of  the  less  frequent  and  cell  cycle  stage-dependent  nature  of  
HDR. Also, the effective delivery of the donor template has posed a serious chal- 
lenge. To overcome this, an elegant method was devised, called prime editing. Prime  
editing depends on a two-component system that includes (1) Cas9 nickase fused  
with a reverse transcriptase and (2) a prime editing guide RNA (pegRNA) that car- 
ries the desired edit(s) to be incorporated into the genome. Once delivered, the com- 
plex is guided to the target site by pegRNA and a nick is created in the genome. The  
nicked DNA serves as a primer that the reverse transcriptase uses to reverse tran- 
scribe the pegRNA, thus incorporating the edit into the genome (Anzalone et al.  
2019; Lin et al. 2020). All the above-discussed techniques were successfully applied  
in rice and other plant species to edit various genes. The following few paragraphs  
will provide a glimpse of the application of genome editing in rice, focusing mainly  
on disease resistance. 

7.2      Application of Genome Editing in Biotic Stress   
          Tolerance in Rice 

Conventional breeding has been successfully employed to date to develop disease-  
resistant rice varieties by introgressing resistance genes from wild rice varieties or  
landraces   into   elite   cultivars.   Although   successful,   it   is   a   time-consuming  

----------------------- Page 368-----------------------

358                                                                      M. Jamaloddin et al. 

procedure, and also the wild germplasm does not contain genes/loci for all the eco- 
nomically  important  traits  that  are  of  concern  for  breeders.  With  the  advent  of  
genome  editing,  several  research  groups  started  testing  the  possibility  of  using  
genome editing in rice and were by and large successful. 

7.2.1    Resistance to Biotic Stress Factors 

Genome editing has been successfully employed to generate rice plants resistant to  
various biotic stress factors, including bacterial blight, bacterial leaf streak, blast,  
and tungro virus. The application of genome-editing techniques for BB resistance  
began  with  modifying  the  promoter  of  a  BB  susceptibility  gene,  OsSWEET14  
(Os11N3), using TALENs (Li et al. 2012). SWEET genes are sugar transporters, and  
the expression of certain SWEET genes is induced upon Xoo infection by the action  
of  TALEs.  So  far,  the  SWEET  genes,  including   OsSWEET11,  OsSWEET12,  
OsSWEET13, OsSWEET14, and OsSWEET15, have been shown to be induced by  
Xoo and could act as susceptibility factors (Streubel et al. 2013). TAL effectors bind  
to  the  effector-binding  elements  (EBEs)  in  the  target  promoter  and  activate  the  
expression  of  the  downstream  gene,  which  tends  to  be  a  susceptibility  factor  in  
many cases. Different TAL effectors induce many such susceptibility genes, and  
their  cognate  EBEs  were  also  deciphered.  Li  et  al.  (2012)  have  successfully  
employed TALENs to modify the EBEs of OsSWEET14. This study established the  
possibility of using genome-editing techniques to generate disease-resistant variet- 
ies as well as to understand the targets of different TAL effectors. Jiang et al. (2020)  
have conducted a proof-of-concept study to confirm the applicability of the CRISPR-  
Cas9  system  in  rice  by  editing  the  promoters  of  OsSWEET11  and  OsSWEET14  
genes (Jiang et al. 2013). In a study using CRISPR-Cas9, Zhou et al. (2015) created  
a null mutant of  OsSWEET13 to show that PthXo2 (an Xoo TAL effector)-depen- 
dent disease occurrence needs intact OsSWEET13. Xu et al. (2019) used CRISPR-  
Cas9 to edit OsSWEET11 and  OsSWEET14 to engineer broad-spectrum resistance  
to BB in rice variety Kitaake. In addition to that, they identified new EBEs in the  
promoter of OsSWEET13 and successfully used CRISPR-Cas9 to disrupt the EBE,  
thus generating a rice line that was resistant to all the tested Xoo isolates (n = 133)  
(Xu et al. 2019). Oliva et al. (2019) generated five mutations in the promoters of  
OsSWEET11, OsSWEET13, and OsSWEET14 in three rice lines, Kitaake, IR64, and  
Ciherang-Sub1. All  the  lines  were  reported  to  show  robust  and  broad-spectrum  
resistance in the paddy trials (Oliva et al. 2019). Zhou et al. (2018) used CRISPR-  
Cas9 to create a knockout of a susceptibility gene called BsrK-1 (broad-spectrum  
resistance Kitaake-1), which resulted in resistance to BB as well as blast. BsrK-1 is  
a tetratricopeptide domain-containing protein that was shown to bind to the mRNAs  
of multiple  OsPAL (phenylalanine ammonia-lyase) genes and promote their turn- 
over. In BsrK-1 knockouts, the accumulation of OsPAL mRNA was observed along  
with  increased  resistance  to  diseases  (Zhou  et  al.  2018).  The  feasibility  of  the  

----------------------- Page 369-----------------------

Molecular Approaches for Disease Resistance in Rice                                                            359 

transgene- free   method   of   genome   editing   was   tested   by   mutating   Os8N3/ 
OsSWEET11 (Kim et al. 2019). Cai et al. (2017) demonstrated that a TAL effector  
(Tal7) from X. oryzae pv. oryzicola RS105 targets the promoter of rice Cyclin-D4-1  
and induces its expression. They have successfully applied TALEN-based genome  
editing to disrupt the EBE in the promoter of Cyclin-D4-1, which leads to resistance  
to RS105 infection. 
    The applicability of CRISPR-Cas9 for generating blast-resistant rice lines has  
been demonstrated by performing both single-site and multisite-targeted mutagen- 
esis of  OsERF922, a negative regulator of blast resistance, to produce knockouts.  
All the mutants showed blast resistance while not having any adverse effect on other  
agronomic traits (Wang et al. 2016). Rice tungro disease (RTD) is a disease caused  
by rice tungrospherical virus (RTSV) and rice tungrobacilliform virus (RTBV) and  
is transmitted by green leafhoppers. RTD results in yellowing of leaves, decreased  
tiller numbers, and stunted growth (Azzam and Chancellor 2002; Lee et al. 2010).  
Macovei et al. (2018) generated RTSV-resistant lines in the background of IR64  
using  the  CRISPR-Cas9  system.  In  this  study,  the  eIF4G  gene  was  successfully  
mutated independently, using three different gRNAs, and the mutant plants showed  
heritable resistance to RTSV (Macovei et al. 2018). 

7.2.2      Summary of Nonbiotic Stress-Related Phenotypes 

The application of genome editing in rice is rising with time. Other than for biotic  
stress tolerance, genome editing has been successfully applied to edit several genes  
having various roles, including nutritional value, yield, and abiotic stress tolerance  
(Shan et al. 2015; Li et al. 2016; Sun et al. 2016; Shen et al. 2017; Tang et al. 2017;  
Abe et al. 2018; Endo et al. 2019; Romero and Gatica-Arias 2019). 

7.3      Improvements in the Techniques  

Currently, transgene-free methods are being tested and employed for genome edit- 
ing wherein the mutant plants do not contain any of the CRISPR-Cas9 components.  
This is achieved in several ways, including using Cas9-gRNA ribonucleoproteins  
(RNPs). This RNP complex is directly delivered into plant cells by transfection or  
particle  bombardment.  The  RNP  complex  can  perform  the  editing  and  will  be  
degraded  by  the  cellular  types  of  machinery. Another  approach  is  to  transiently  
express CRISPR-Cas9 from DNA or RNA in plants from regenerated calli. Both  
methods suffer from the possibility of component degradation, which might lead to  
less-efficient editing. To eliminate this disadvantage, He et al. (2018) came up with  
the suicide gene-based method of a transgene-free CRISPR-Cas9 approach in rice.  
In this method, a pair of suicidal genes, encoding toxic proteins that kill plant cells,  

----------------------- Page 370-----------------------

360                                                                     M. Jamaloddin et al. 

are  incorporated  into  the  CRISPR-Cas9  cassette.  Therefore,  no  plant  with  a  
CRISPR-Cas9  construct  will  survive,  thus  eliminating  the  plants  containing  the  
transgenes. Among other surviving plants, the true mutants can be screened and  
identified using appropriate techniques. In addition to protein-coding genes, miR- 
NAs are being targeted for editing owing to their involvement in various growth,  
development, and stress-response pathways. The use of the CRISPR-Cas system to  
edit miRNAs has been functionally validated in rice (Zhou et al. 2017; Mangrauthia  
et al. 2017). 

8     Bioinformatics Tools for Disease Resistance  
     and Management 

Bioinformatics  is  an  interdisciplinary  field  that  uses  computational  tools  to  
capture and interpret the function of various genes. The advent of genomics has  
revolutionized every aspect of life science. The availability of a large amount of  
data has necessitated better ways to analyze, interpret, and organize the results  
for the scientific community (Bayat 2002; Vassilev et al. 2005). Thousands of  
databases  and  repositories  are  available  for  various  datasets  such  as  for  the  
genome,  gene  and  protein  sequences,  expression  and  coexpression  of  genes,  
and  genomic  variations  such  as  SNPs  and  InDels,  to  name  a  few  (Garg  and  
Jaiswal 2016). With time, sequencing platforms have seen an astounding revo- 
lution and are becoming more efficient and affordable day by day. Since the  
first report on the whole-genome sequence of rice in 2005, many varieties were  
further sequenced as a part of the 3000 Rice Genomes Project (Matsumoto et al.  
2005; Li et al. 2014). The data obtained from the project resulted in establishing  
rice variation databases and these data have provided invaluable insights into  
rice  evolution  and  domestication  (Chen  et  al.  2019).  Moreover,  the  readily  
available data can guide breeders to wisely choose varieties and markers for  
breeding  various  traits  from  one  cultivar  to  another.  Procedures  to  score  the  
expression of genes have also undergone an overwhelming transformation from  
methods such as serial analysis of gene expression (SAGE) to microarrays to  
RNA-sequencing (Perez-de-Castro et al. 2012). As a result, other than genome  
databases, gene and protein expression databases play an important role in elu- 
cidating the various mechanisms that control a given trait, such as days to flow- 
ering, growth and development, abiotic stress tolerance, and disease resistance,  
among  others.  Multiple  other  tools  and  databases  are  available  to  study  and  
acquire  information  on  different  aspects,  including  phylogenomics,  protein- 
protein interaction, promoter analysis, gene and QTL information, marker-trait  
association, and metabolite profiles (Garg and Jaiswal 2016). This section aims  
to provide an overview of the application of bioinformatics in breeding for dis- 
ease resistance in rice. 

----------------------- Page 371-----------------------

Molecular Approaches for Disease Resistance in Rice                                        361 

8.1      The Role of Bioinformatics in Mapping Genomic Loci 

8.1.1     Mapping QTLs and Genes Associated with Disease Resistance 

Mapping the loci responsible for a desired trait has been successfully carried out for  
years  using  a  conventional  method  such  as  simple  sequence  repeat  (SSR)-based  
genotyping of a mapping population. With the arrival of affordable sequencing tech- 
niques, QTLs and genes can now be mapped at a gene-level resolution. Methods  
such as MutMap and QTLseq have made it possible not only to identify the genomic  
locus responsible for a trait but also to pinpoint the causal variation within a gene  
that led to the phenotype (Abe et al. 2012; Takagi et al. 2013b). Thus, SNP markers  
that are highly associated with a trait can be identified and employed in breeding  
programmed  for  efficient  introgression  of  the  trait.  In  a  proof-of-concept  study,  
Takagi et al. (2013a) had identified a QTL conferring partial resistance to blast dis- 
ease of rice. Following this attempt, multiple studies have successfully used this  
procedure  to  map  QTLs  for  various  traits  in  rice  and  other  species. A  rice  blast  
resistance  gene  called  Pii  was  mapped  by  another  method  called  MutMap-Gap  
(Takagi et al. 2013b). 
    Sequencing data have been successfully used to compare the genomes of differ- 
ent cultivars and obtain the resistance alleles of cloned rice blast resistance genes  
(Mahesh et al. 2016). Genes with highly repetitive sequences pose a challenge in  
accurately characterizing them in context with short-read sequences. A recent study  
by  Read  et  al.  (2020)  addressed  this  challenge  by  using  a  long-read  sequencing  
approach called nanopore sequencing in combination with Illumina sequencing to  
assemble the genome of American rice variety Carolina Gold Select and identify  
529 complete or partial NB-LRR domain-containing protein genes that are highly  
repetitive in nature. The study identified a major disease resistance locus called Xo1  
that confers resistance to Xanthomonas oryzae pv. oryzae (the causal agent of bacte- 
rial blight of rice) and X. oryzae pv.  oryzicola (the causal agent of bacterial leaf  
streak of rice). Also, a blast resistance gene called Pi63 at the Xo1 locus was identi- 
fied (Read et al. 2020). Another study compared the genomes of 13 domesticated  
and wild rice relatives and shed light on the complex phylogeny of the Oryza genus  
and identified many haplotypes of disease-resistance genes that can be of potential  
use  for  breeding  (Stein  et  al.  2018).  Using  the  genome  sequence  of  rice  variety  
Tetep, an extensive set of molecular markers was designed for breeding novel resis- 
tant varieties (Wang et al. 2019). 

8.1.2     Genome-Wide Association Studies 

Genome-wide association studies (GWAS) exploit the natural variation among dif- 
ferent cultivars to identify trait-associated genes (Hu et al. 2018). This is one of the  
preferred methods for the identification of gene targets for breeding. The availabil- 
ity of genome sequences and phenotype data, along with powerful statistical and  

----------------------- Page 372-----------------------

362                                                                     M. Jamaloddin et al. 

bioinformatics tools, have made it possible to analyze hundreds or thousands of  
genomes in one go and identify genes and haplotypes that are associated with given  
traits. A GWAS on 373  indica rice sequences identified SNPs associated with 14  
different agronomic characteristics (Huang et al. 2010). A GWAS with a panel of  
584 rice accessions led to the identification of a gene called  PiPR1 that confers  
partial resistance to blast disease of rice (Liu et al. 2020). Other GWAS have identi- 
fied tens of QTLs and new alleles of known blast-resistance genes (Li et al. 2019a). 

8.1.3    Speeding Up Breeding 

The main setback with conventional breeding methods is the time taken for devel- 
oping a new variety. Also, for durable disease resistance and other complex traits, it  
is essential to efficiently identify minor-effect QTLs and use the associated markers  
in breeding programs. The existing methods, including QTL mapping from biparen- 
tal crossing and GWAS, are not up to the mark to efficiently identify such minor-  
effect QTLs (Bhat et al. 2016). To address both of these concerns, genomic selection  
(GS) was proposed (Meuwissen et al. 2001). Unlike MAS, GS does not necessarily  
need QTL information before selection. GS uses reference population data contain- 
ing phenotype and high-density marker data to predict breeding values for all the  
markers. Based on the predicted values, the breeding population data will be ana- 
lyzed  to  select  the  individual  that  possesses  the  desirable  phenotype  (Perez-de-  
Castro et al.  2012; Hu et al. 2018). In this way, it is possible to introgress even  
minor-effect QTLs efficiently, as there are no biased marker effects, unlike with  
MAS. Studies on other plant species have shown the higher prediction accuracy of  
GS in genetic gains and a significant decrease in the time taken for breeding (Hu  
et al. 2018). Although proposed two decades ago, the implementation of GS in crop  
breeding  has  just  begun,  mainly  because  of  the  advent  of  high-throughput  and  
affordable  genotyping  methods  that  produce  dense  marker  information  such  as  
genotyping-by-sequencing and automated phenotyping (Bhat et al.  2016). Given  
the importance of disease-resistance breeding in rice, the application of GS could be  
of tremendous benefit. 

8.1.4    Using Machine Learning and Artificial Intelligence 

The field of computational biology is advancing at an unprecedented rate with the  
arrival of machine learning (ML) and artificial intelligence (AI). In ML, the machine  
gains experience by identifying patterns in given datasets and using that experience  
to interpret the data in question. ML has applications in various aspects of plant sci- 
ences,  including  phenotyping  and  increasing  the  accuracy  of  sequence  analysis  
pipelines, such as differentiating true SNPs from spurious SNPs (Hu et al.  2018).  
ML was successfully used to phenotype and categorize foliar stresses in soybean  

----------------------- Page 373-----------------------

Molecular Approaches for Disease Resistance in Rice                                               363 

with high accuracy (Ghosal et al. 2018). Various parameters such as yield, develop- 
mental stage, weed status, crop quality, water and soil management, and disease  
occurrence  were  successfully  predicted  using  ML  (Liakos  et  al.  2018).  In  rice,  
bakanae disease (caused by Fusarium fujikuroi) was predicted with an accuracy of  
87.9% using support vector machine classifiers, a popular ML tool that is often used  
to overcome classification and regression problems (Chung et al. 2016). Although  
few in number, these studies have put forth the applicability of advanced computa- 
tional strategies to improve agriculture. 

9      Future Prospects and Conclusions 

The rice crop plays an essential role in ensuring global food security and providing  
nutritional security for the rapidly growing world population. Increasing grain yield  
is a significant target for plant breeders apart from identifying resistance to/toler- 
ance of biotic and abiotic stresses. Enhancing genetic gain is also a primary concern  
to meet the food demand of the ever-increasing world population, especially with  
global climate change. In recent years, the innovations in rice breeding programs  
and advanced genomics technologies such as next-generation sequencing and high-  
throughput genotyping have been fully exploited to understand trait interactions and  
select promising rice genotypes for use in breeding programs. The genetic improve- 
ments in yield component traits and increasing yield significantly under biotic and  
abiotic stresses have not been achieved to a great extent due to the complex nature  
of these stresses. The knowledge of integrated genomics and high-throughput phe- 
nomics technologies has laid the foundation to understand these complex traits and  
also associated molecular genetics and physiological mechanisms that can enable  
breeders to find better rice genotypes and to move forward as knowledge-based rice  
breeding is the most acceptable approach in developing climate-smart stress- tolerant  
and high-yielding rice genotypes. This approach has advanced at a fast pace with  
low-cost, efficiency, and high resolution of genetic mapping for QTLs and genes  
and also haplotype blocks to find allelic variations for the target trait of interest. The  
current advances in CRISPR/Cas9 genome-editing tools have led to significant tar- 
geted changes in specific trait-associated genes and changes in single base levels  
that  promise  to  accelerate  crop  improvement.  These  genomic-assisted  breeding  
tools are breeder-friendly, and smart decisions in breeding programs can enhance  
the efficiency of the selection of rice genotypes in a short period. 

Acknowledgments   The authors would like to thank and acknowledge the Bill & Melinda Gates  
Foundation  for  providing  a  research  grant  to  ZL  for  the  Green  Super  Rice  project  under  ID  
OPP1130530. We would like to thank the Department of Agriculture, Philippines, for providing  
funds to JA under the Next-Gen project and also thank and acknowledge IRRI Communications  
for English-language editing and the anonymous internal reviewer’s valuable suggestions and con- 
structive comments that helped improve this chapter. 

----------------------- Page 374-----------------------

364                                                                                 M. Jamaloddin et al. 

References 

Abdallah NA, Prakash CS, McHughen AG (2015) Genome editing for crop improvement: chal- 
    lenges and opportunities. GM Crops Food 6:183–205 
Abe A, Kosugi S, Yoshida K et al (2012) Genome sequencing reveals agronomically important loci  
    in rice using MutMap. Nat Biotechnol 30:174–178. https://doi.org/10.1038/nbt.2095 
Abe K, Araki E, Suzuki Y et al (2018) Production of high oleic/low linoleic rice by genome edit- 
    ing. Plant Physiol Biochem 131:58–62. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.plaphy.2018.04.033 
Adorada DL, Stodart BJ, Cruz CV et al (2013) Standardizing resistance screening to Pseudomonas  
   fuscovaginae   and  evaluation  of  rice  germplasm  at  seedling  and  adult  plant  growth  stages.  
    Euphytica 192:1–16. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10681- 012- 0804- z 
Ahn S, Kim Y, Han S et al (1996) Molecular mapping of a gene for resistance to a Korean isolate  
    of rice blast. Rice Genet Newsl 13:74–76 
Ahn SN, Kim YK, Hong HC et al (1997) Mapping of genes conferring resistance to Korean iso- 
    lates of rice blast fungus using DNA markers. Korean J Breed 29:416–423 
Ali J, Xu JL, Gao YM et al (2017) Harnessing the hidden genetic diversity for improving multiple  
    abiotic stress tolerance in rice (Oryza sativa L.). PLoS One 12:e0172515 
Andargie  M,  Li  L,  Feng A  et  al  (2018)  Mapping  of  the  quantitative  trait  locus  (QTL)  confer- 
    ring resistance to rice false smut disease. Curr Plant Biol 15:38–43. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
    cpb.2018.11.003 
Anderson  S  (2002)  The  relationship  between  nutrients  and  other  elements  to  plant  diseases.  
    Spectrum Analytic Inc, Washington CH, OH, pp 26–32 
Anderson PK, Cunningham AA, Patel NG et al (2004) Emerging infectious diseases of plants:  
    pathogen pollution, climate change and agrotechnology drivers. Trends Ecol Evol 19:535–544 
Anjaneyulu   A,   Singh   SK,   Shenoi   MM   (1982)   Evaluation   of   rice   varieties   for   tungro  
    resistance   by   field  screening   techniques.   Trop    Pest   Manag    28:147–155.     https://doi. 
    org/10.1080/09670878209370692 
Anzalone  AV,  Randolph  PB,  Davis  JR  et  al  (2019)  Search-and-replace  genome  editing  with- 
    out  double-strand  breaks  or  donor  DNA.  Nature  576:149–157.  https://doi.org/10.1038/ 
    s41586- 019- 1711- 4 
Ashikawa  I,  Hayashi  N, Yamane  H  et  al  (2008) Two  adjacent  nucleotide-binding  site-leucine-  
    rich  repeat  class  genes  are  required  to  confer  Pikm-specific  rice  blast  resistance.  Genetics  
    180:2267–2276. https://doi.org/10.1534/genetics.108.095034 
Ashkani S, Rafii MY, Shabanimofrad M et al (2015) Molecular breeding strategy and challenges  
    towards improvement of blast disease resistance in rice crop. Front Plant Sci 6:886 
Azzam O, Chancellor TCB (2002) The biology, epidemiology, and management of rice tungro  
    disease in Asia. Plant Dis 86:88–100 
Bainsla NK, Meena HP (2016) Breeding for resistance to biotic stresses in plants. In: Yadav P,  
    Kumar S, Jain V (eds) Recent advances in plant stress physiology. Daya Publishing House,  
    New Delhi 
Balachiranjeevi C, Bhaskar NS, Abhilash V et al (2015) Marker-assisted introgression of bacterial  
    blight and blast resistance into DRR17B, an elite, fine-grain type maintainer line of rice. Mol  
    Breed 35:151. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11032- 015- 0348- 8 
Balachiranjeevi CH, Bhaskar Naik S, Abhilash Kumar V et al (2018) Marker-assisted pyramiding  
    of two major, broad-spectrum bacterial blight-resistance genes, Xa21 and Xa33 into an elite  
    maintainer  line  of  rice,  DRR17B.  PLoS  One  13:e0201271.  https://doi.org/10.1371/journal. 
    pone.0201271 
Balachiranjeevi  CH,  Prahalada  GD,  Mahender A  et  al  (2019)  Identification  of  a  novel  locus,  
    BPH38 (t), conferring resistance to brown planthopper (Nilaparvata lugens Stal.) using early  
    backcross population in rice (Oryza sativa L.). Euphytica 215:185 
Bargaz A, Lyamlouli K, Chtouki M et al (2018) Soil microbial resources for improving fertilizers  
    efficiency in an integrated plant nutrient management system. Front Microbiol 9:1606 

----------------------- Page 375-----------------------

Molecular Approaches for Disease Resistance in Rice                                                   365 

Barman   SR,   Gowda   M,   Venu   RC,   Chattoo   BB   (2004)   Identification   of   a   major   blast  
    resistance   gene   in  the  rice   cultivar  “Tetep”.   Plant   Breed   123:300–302.     https://doi. 
    org/10.1111/j.1439- 0523.2004.00982.x 
Bayat A (2002) Bioinformatics. Br Med J 324:1018–1022 
Begum N, Rahman MM, Bashar MA et al (2011) Effect of potassium fertilizer on development of  
    bacterial blight of rice. Bangladesh J Sci Ind Res 46:69–76 
Berruyer R, Adreit H, Milazzo J et al (2003) Identification and fine-mapping of  Pi33, the rice  
    resistance gene corresponding to the Magnaporthe grisea avirulence gene ACE1 . Theor Appl  
    Genet 107:1139–1147. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00122- 003- 1349- 2 
Bhasin H, Bhatia D, Raghuvanshi S et al (2012) New PCR-based sequence-tagged site marker for  
    bacterial blight-resistance gene Xa38 of rice. Mol Breed 30:607–611. https://doi.org/10.1007/ 
    s11032- 011- 9646- y 
Bhat ZA, Ahangar MA, Sanghera GS, Mubarak T (2013) Effect of cultivar, fungicide spray and  
    nitrogen fertilization on management of rice blast under temperate ecosystem. Int J Sci Environ  
    Technol 2:410–415 
Bhat JA, Ali S, Salgotra RK et al (2016) Genomic selection in the era of next-generation sequenc- 
    ing for complex traits in plant breeding. Front Genet 7:221 
Bigirimana VP, Hua GKH, Nyamangyoku OI, Hòfte M (2015) Rice sheath rot: an emerging ubiq- 
    uitous destructive disease complex. Front Plant Sci 6:1066 
Boch J (2011) TALEs of genome targeting. Nat Biotechnol 29:135–136 
Boch J, Scholze H, Schornack S et al (2009) Breaking the code of DNA binding specificity of  
    TAL-type III effectors. Science 326:1509–1512. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1178811 
Bolton MD, Thomma BPHJ (2008) The complexity of nitrogen metabolism and nitrogen- regulated  
    gene expression in plant pathogenic fungi. Physiol Mol Plant Pathol 72:104–110 
Bonman JM (1992) Durable resistance to rice blast disease-environmental influences. Euphytica  
    63:115–123. https://doi.org/10.1007/BF00023917 
Bossa-Castro AM, Tekete C, Raghavan C et al (2018) Allelic variation for broad-spectrum resis- 
    tance and susceptibility to bacterial pathogens identified in a rice MAGIC population. Plant  
    Biotechnol J 16:1559–1568. https://doi.org/10.1111/pbi.12895 
Bunawan  H,  Dusik  L,  Bunawan  SN,  Amin  NM  (2014)  Rice  tungro  disease:  from  identifica- 
    tion  to  disease  control.  World  Appl  Sci  J  31:1221–1226.  https://doi.org/10.5829/idosi. 
    wasj.2014.31.06.610 
Busungu  C,  Taura  S,  Sakagami  JI,  Ichitani  K  (2016)  Identification  and  linkage  analysis  of  a  
    new  rice  bacterial  blight-resistance  gene  from  XM14,  a  mutant  line  from  IR24.  Breed  Sci  
    66:636–645. https://doi.org/10.1270/jsbbs.16062 
Cai L, Cao Y, Xu Z et al (2017) A transcription activator-like effector Tal7 of Xanthomonas ory- 
    zae pv. oryzicola activates rice gene  Os09g29100 to suppress rice immunity. Sci Rep 7:1–13.  
    https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598- 017- 04800- 8 
Causse MA, Fulton TM, Cho YG et al (1994) Saturated molecular map of the rice genome based  
    on an interspecific backcross population. Genetics 138:1251–1274 
Cesari S, Thilliez G, Ribot C et al (2013) The rice resistance protein pair RGA4/RGA5 recog- 
    nizes the Magnaporthe oryzae effectors AVR-Pia and AVR1-CO39 by direct binding. Plant  
    Cell 25:1463–1481. https://doi.org/10.1105/tpc.112.107201 
Channamallikarjuna V, Sonah H, Prasad M et al (2010) Identification of major quantitative trait loci  
    qSBR11-1 for sheath blight resistance in rice. Mol Breed 25:155–166. https://doi.org/10.1007/ 
    s11032- 009- 9316- 5 
Chaudhari AK,  Rakholiya  KB,  Baria TT  (2019)  Screening  of  rice  cultivars  against  false  smut  
    [Ustilaginoidea virens (Cooke) Takahashi] of rice. Int J Curr Microbiol App Sci 8:2786–2793.  
    https://doi.org/10.20546/ijcmas.2019.806.336 
Cheema KK, Grewal NK, Vikal Y et al (2008) A novel bacterial blight-resistance gene from Oryza  
    nivara mapped to 38 kb region on chromosome 4L and transferred to  Oryza sativa L. Genet  
    Res (Camb) 90:397–407. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0016672308009786 

----------------------- Page 376-----------------------

366                                                                                M. Jamaloddin et al. 

Chen DH, Dela Viña M, Inukai T et al (1999) Molecular mapping of the blast resistance gene,  
    Pi44(t), in a line derived from a durably resistant rice cultivar. Theor Appl Genet 98:1046–1053.  
    https://doi.org/10.1007/s001220051166 
Chen XW, Li SG, Xu JC et al (2004) Identification of two blast resistance genes in a rice variety,  
    Digu. J Phytopathol 152:77–85. https://doi.org/10.1046/j.1439- 0434.2003.00803.x 
Chen C, Zheng W, Huang X et al (2006a) Major QTL conferring resistance to rice bacterial leaf  
    streak. Agric Sci China 5:216–220. https://doi.org/10.1016/S1671- 2927(06)60041- 2 
Chen X, Shang J, Chen D et al (2006b) A B-lectin receptor kinase gene conferring rice blast resis- 
    tance. Plant J 46:794–804. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1365- 313X.2006.02739.x 
Chen  S,  Huang  Z,  Zeng  L  et  al  (2008)  High-resolution  mapping  and  gene  prediction  of  
    Xanthomonas  oryzae  pv.  oryzae  resistance  gene  Xa7 .  Mol  Breed  22:433–441.  https://doi. 
    org/10.1007/s11032- 008- 9187- 1 
Chen J, Shi Y, Liu W et al (2011a) A Pid3 allele from rice cultivar Gumei2 confers resistance to  
    Magnaporthe oryzae . J Genet Genom 38:209–216. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jgg.2011.03.010 
Chen S, Liu X, Zeng L et al (2011b) Genetic analysis and molecular mapping of a novel reces- 
    sive gene xa34(t) for resistance against Xanthomonas oryzae pv.  oryzae. Theor Appl Genet  
    122:1331–1338. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00122- 011- 1534- 7 
Chen J, Peng P, Tian J et al (2015) Pike, a rice blast resistance allele consisting of two adjacent  
    NBS–LRR genes, was identified as a novel allele at the Pik locus. Mol Breed 35:1–15. https:// 
    doi.org/10.1007/s11032- 015- 0305- 6 
Chen  E,  Huang  X, Tian  Z  et  al  (2019) The  genomics  of  Oryza  species  provides  insights  into  
    rice domestication and heterosis. Annu Rev Plant Biol 70:639–665.  https://doi.org/10.1146/ 
    annurev- arplant- 050718- 100320 
Chen S, Wang C, Yang J et al (2020) Identification of the novel bacterial blight-resistance gene  
    Xa46(t)  by  mapping  and  expression  analysis  of  the  rice  mutant  H120.  Sci  Rep  10:12642.  
    https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598- 020- 69639- y 
Chisholm ST, Coaker G, Day B et al (2006) Host-microbe interactions: shaping the evolution of  
    the plant immune response. Cell 124:803–814 
Christian M, Cermak T, Doyle EL et al (2010) Targeting DNA double-strand breaks with TAL  
    effector nucleases. Genetics 186:756–761. https://doi.org/10.1534/genetics.110.120717 
Chu Z, Fu B, Yang H et al (2006) Targeting xa13, a recessive gene for bacterial blight-resistance in  
    rice. Theor Appl Genet 112:455–461. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00122- 005- 0145- 6 
Chung CL, Huang KJ, Chen SY et al (2016) Detecting Bakanae disease in rice seedlings by machine  
    vision. Comput Electron Agric 121:404–411. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compag.2016.01.008 
Collard BC, Ismail AM, Hardy B (eds) (2013) EIRLSBN: twenty years of achievements in rice  
    breeding. International Rice Research Institute, Los Baños. 145 p 
Cong L, Ran FA, Cox D et al (2013) Multiplex genome engineering using CRISPR/Cas systems.  
    Science 339:819–823 
Deltcheva E, Chylinski K, Sharma CM et al (2011) CRISPR RNA maturation by trans-encoded  
    small RNA and host factor RNase III. Nature 471:602–607. https://doi.org/10.1038/nature09886 
Deng Y, Zhai K, Xie Z et al (2017) Epigenetic regulation of antagonistic receptors confers rice blast  
    resistance with yield balance. Science 355:962–965. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.aai8898 
Devi SJSR, Singh K, Umakanth B et al (2020) Identification and characterization of a large effect  
    QTL from Oryza glumaepatula revealed Pi68(t) as putative candidate gene for rice blast resis- 
    tance. Rice 13:17. https://doi.org/10.1186/s12284- 020- 00378- 4 
Dordas C (2008) Role of nutrients in controlling plant diseases in sustainable agriculture. A review.  
    Agron Sustain Dev 28:33–46 
Eizenga  GC,  Lee  FN,  Rutger  JN  (2002)  Screening  Oryza  species  plants  for  rice  sheath  blight  
    resistance. Plant Dis 86:808–812 
Eizenga GC, Prasad B, Jackson AK, Jia MH (2013) Identification of rice sheath blight and blast  
    quantitative trait loci in two different O. sativa/O. nivara advanced backcross populations. Mol  
    Breed 31:889–907. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11032- 013- 9843- y 

----------------------- Page 377-----------------------

Molecular Approaches for Disease Resistance in Rice                                                    367 

Endo M, Mikami M, Endo A et al (2019) Genome editing in plants by engineered CRISPR–Cas9  
    recognizing NG PAM. Nat Plants 5:14–17. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41477- 018- 0321- 8 
Fageria NK, Baligar VC, Li YC (2008) The role of nutrient efficient plants in improving crop  
    yields in the twenty first century. J Plant Nutr 31:1121–1157 
FAOSTAT (2020) Statistics data. Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, Rome.  
    http://www.fao.org/faostat/en/#dat 
Feng Z, Zhang B, Ding W et al (2013) Efficient genome editing in plants using a CRISPR/Cas  
    system. Cell Res 23:1229–1232 
Feng B, Chen K, Cui Y et al (2018) Genetic dissection and simultaneous improvement of drought  
    and low nitrogen tolerances by designed QTL pyramiding in rice. Front Plant Sci 9:306. https:// 
    doi.org/10.3389/fpls.2018.00306 
Fjellstrom  R,  Conaway-Bormans  CA,  McClung AM  et  al  (2004)  Development  of  DNA  mark- 
    ers  suitable  for  marker-assisted  selection  of  three  Pi  genes  conferring  resistance  to  mul- 
    tiple  Pyricularia   grisea   pathotypes.    Crop   Sci   44:1790–1798.      https://doi.org/10.2135/ 
    cropsci2004.1790 
Fu D, Chen L, Yu G et al (2011) QTL mapping of sheath blight resistance in a deep-water rice  
    cultivar. Euphytica 180:209–218. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10681- 011- 0366- 5 
Fujii K, Hayano-Saito Y, Shumiya A et al (1995) Genetical mapping based on the RFLP analysis  
    for the panicle blast resistance derived from a rice parental line St. No. 1. Breed Sci 45:209 
Fukuoka S, Saka N, Koga H et al (2009) Loss of function of a proline-containing protein con- 
    fers   durable   disease   resistance   in   rice.   Science   325:998–1001.   https://doi.org/10.1126/ 
    science.1175550 
Gaj  T,  Gersbach  CA,  Barbas  CF  (2013)  ZFN,  TALEN,  and  CRISPR/Cas-based  methods  for  
    genome engineering. Trends Biotechnol 31:397–405 
Gaj T, Sirk SJ, Shui S, Liu J (2016) Genome-editing technologies: principles and applications.  
    Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol 8:a023754 
Garg P, Jaiswal P (2016) Databases and bioinformatics tools for rice research. Curr Plant Biol  
    7–8:39–52. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cpb.2016.12.006 
Ghosal S, Blystone D, Singh AK et al (2018) An explainable deep machine vision framework for  
    plant stress phenotyping. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 115:4613–4618. https://doi.org/10.1073/ 
    pnas.1716999115 
Goad DM, Jia Y, Gibbons A et al (2020) Identification of novel QTL conferring sheath blight  
    resistance  in  two  weedy  rice  mapping  populations.  Rice  13:21.  https://doi.org/10.1186/ 
    s12284- 020- 00381- 9 
Gopalakrishnan  S,  Sharma  RK,  Anand  Rajkumar  K  et  al  (2008)  Integrating  marker-assisted  
    background     analysis   with   foreground    selection  for   identification  of   superior   bacte- 
    rial  blight-resistant  recombinants  in  Basmati  rice.  Plant  Breed  127:131–139.  https://doi. 
    org/10.1111/j.1439- 0523.2007.01458.x 
Goto I (1970) Genetic studies on the resistance of rice plant to the blast fungus. Jpn J Phytopathol  
    36:304–312. https://doi.org/10.3186/jjphytopath.36.304 
Goto I (1988) Genetic studies on resistance of rice plant to blast fungus (VII): blast resistance  
    genes of Kuroka. Ann Phytopathol Soc Jpn 54:460–465 
Gowda  M,  Roy-Barman  S,  Chattoo  BB  (2006)  Molecular  mapping  of  a  novel  blast  resistance  
    gene  Pi38  in  rice  using  SSLP  and  AFLP  markers.  Plant  Breed  125:596–599.  https://doi. 
    org/10.1111/j.1439- 0523.2006.01248.x 
Graichen  FAS,  Martinelli  JA,  Federizzi  LC  et  al  (2010)  Inheritance  of  resistance  to  oat  
    crown  rust  in  recombinant  inbred  lines.  Sci  Agric  67:435–440.  https://doi.org/10.1590/ 
    s0103- 90162010000400010 
Gu K, Yang B, Tian D et al (2005) R-gene expression induced by a type-III effector triggers disease  
    resistance in rice. Nature 435:1122–1125. https://doi.org/10.1038/nature03630 
Guo SB, Zhang DP, Lin XH (2010) Identification and mapping of a novel bacterial blight- resistance  
    gene Xa35(t) originated from Oryza minuta. Scientia Agricultura Sinica 43:2611–2618 

----------------------- Page 378-----------------------

368                                                                                  M. Jamaloddin et al. 

Gupta  RM,  Musunuru  K  (2014)  Expanding  the  genetic  editing  tool  kit:  ZFNs,  TALENs,  and  
    CRISPR-Cas9. J Clin Invest 124:4154–4161 
Hajira SK, Sundaram RM, Laha GS et al (2016) A single-tube, functional marker-based multiplex  
    PCR assay for simultaneous detection of major bacterial blight-resistance genes Xa21 , xa13  
    and xa5 in rice. Rice Sci 23:144. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rsci.2015.11.004 
Han Y, Li D, Yang J et al (2020) Mapping quantitative trait loci for disease resistance to false smut  
    of rice. Phytopathol Res 2:20. https://doi.org/10.1186/s42483- 020- 00059- 6 
Hao L, Ruiying Q, Xiaoshuang L et al (2019) CRISPR/Cas9-mediated adenine base editing in rice  
    genome. Rice Sci 26:125–128 
Hari Y,  Srinivasarao  K, Viraktamath  BC  et  al  (2011)  Marker-assisted  improvement  of  a  stable  
    restorer line, KMR-3R and its derived hybrid KRH2 for bacterial blight resistance and grain  
    quality. Plant Breed 130:608–616. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1439- 0523.2011.01881.x 
Hari Y,  Srinivasarao  K,  Viraktamath  BC  et  al  (2013)  Marker-assisted  introgression  of  bacte- 
    rial blight and blast resistance into IR 58025B, an elite maintainer line of rice. Plant Breed  
    132:586–594. https://doi.org/10.1111/pbr.12056 
Hayasaka T, Fujii H, Ishiguro K (2008) The role of silicon in preventing appressorial penetration  
    by the rice blast fungus. Phytopathology 98:1038–1044 
Hayashi K, Yoshida H (2009) Refunctionalization of the ancient rice blast disease resistance gene  
    Pit  by  the  recruitment  of  a  retrotransposon  as  a  promoter.  Plant  J  57:413–425.  https://doi. 
    org/10.1111/j.1365- 313X.2008.03694.x 
Hayashi K, Yoshida H, Ashikawa I (2006) Development of PCR-based allele-specific and InDel  
    marker sets for nine rice blast-resistance genes. Theor Appl Genet 113:251–260. https://doi. 
    org/10.1007/s00122- 006- 0290- 6 
Hayashi N, Inoue H, Kato T et al (2010) Durable panicle blast-resistance gene Pb1 encodes an  
    atypical  CC-NBS-LRR  protein  and  was  generated  by  acquiring  a  promoter  through  local  
    genome duplication. Plant J 64:498–510. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1365- 313X.2010.04348.x 
He W, Huang D, Li R et al (2012) Identification of a resistance gene bls1 to bacterial leaf streak  
    in  wild  rice  Oryza  rufipogon  Griff.  J  Integr  Agric  11:962–969.  https://doi.org/10.1016/ 
    S2095- 3119(12)60087- 2 
He Y,  Zhu  M,  Wang  L  et  al  (2018)  Programmed  self-elimination  of  the  CRISPR/Cas9  con- 
    struct  greatly  accelerates  the  isolation  of  edited  and  transgene-free  rice  plants.  Mol  Plant  
    11:1210–1213 
Heinrichs EA, Muniappan R (2017) IPM for tropical crops: rice. CAB Rev 12:1 
Hervieux V, Yaganza ES, Arul J, Tweddell RJ (2002) Effect of organic and inorganic salts on the  
    development of Helminthosporium solani, the causal agent of potato silver scurf. Plant Dis  
    86:1014–1018 
Hirochika H, Guiderdoni E, An G et al (2004) Rice mutant resources for gene discovery. Plant Mol  
    Biol 54:325–334. https://doi.org/10.1023/B:PLAN.0000036368.74758.66 
Holland JB (2001) Epistasis and pant breeding. Plant Breed Rev 21:27–92 
Hu H, Scheben A, Edwards D (2018) Advances in integrating genomics and bioinformatics in the  
    plant breeding pipeline. Agriculture 8:75 
Hua L, Wu J, Chen C et al (2012) The isolation of  Pi1, an allele at the Pik locus which con- 
    fers  broad  spectrum  resistance  to  rice  blast. Theor Appl  Genet  125:1047–1055.  https://doi. 
    org/10.1007/s00122- 012- 1894- 7 
Huang N, Angeles ER, Domingo J et al (1997) Pyramiding of bacterial blight-resistance genes in  
    rice: marker-assisted selection using RFLP and PCR. Theor Appl Genet 95:313–320. https:// 
    doi.org/10.1007/s001220050565 
Huang X, Wei X, Sang T et al (2010) Genome-wide asociation studies of 14 agronomic traits in  
    rice landraces. Nat Genet 42:961–967. https://doi.org/10.1038/ng.695 
Huang S, Liu L, Wang L, Hou Y (2019) Research on advance of rice false smut  Ustilaginoidea  
    virens (Cooke) Takah worldwide: Part I. Research status of rice false smut. J Agric Sci 11:240.  
    https://doi.org/10.5539/jas.v11n15p240 

----------------------- Page 379-----------------------

Molecular Approaches for Disease Resistance in Rice                                                     369 

Hutin M, Sabot F, Ghesquière A et al (2015) A knowledge-based molecular screen uncovers a  
    broad-spectrum  OsSWEET14  resistance  allele  to  bacterial  blight  from  wild  rice.  Plant  J  
    84:694–703. https://doi.org/10.1111/tpj.13042 
Ingvardsen  CR,  Schejbel  B,  Lübberstedt  T  (2008)  Functional  markers  in  resistance  breeding.  
    Springer, Berlin, pp 61–87 
Inukai T, Nelson RJ, Zeigler RS et al (1996) Genetic analysis of blast resistance in tropical rice  
    cultivars  using  near-isogenic  lines.  In:  Khush  GS  (ed)  Rice  genetics  III.  International  Rice  
    Research Institute, Los Baños, pp 447–455 
Inukai T, Nagashima S, Kato M (2019) Pid3-I1 is a race-specific partial-resistance allele at the  
    Pid3 blast resistance locus in rice. Theor Appl Genet 132:395–404.  https://doi.org/10.1007/ 
    s00122- 018- 3227- y 
IRRI (1996) Standard evaluation system for rice, 4th edn. International Rice Research Institute,  
    Los Baños 
IRRI (2013) Standard evaluation system for rice, 5th edn. International Rice Research Institute,  
    Los Baños 
Iwata N (1996) Registration of new gene symbols. Rice Genet 13:12–18 
Iyer-Pascuzzi AS, McCouch SR (2007) Functional markers for xa5-mediated resistance in rice  
    (Oryza sativa, L.). Mol Breed 19:291–296. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11032- 006- 9055- 9 
Jabeen R, Rahman SU, Rais A (2011) Evaluating BLB resistance/aggressiveness in rice through  
    best inoculum concentration, inoculation and application methods. Pak J Bot 43:2635–2638 
Jamaloddin M, Durga Rani CV, Swathi G et al (2020) Marker assisted gene pyramiding (MAGP)  
    for  bacterial  blight  and  blast  resistance  into  mega  rice  variety  “Tellahamsa”.  PLoS  One  
    15:e0234088. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0234088 
Jeung JU, Kim BR, Cho YC et al (2007) A novel gene, Pi40(t), linked to the DNA markers derived  
    from NBS-LRR motifs confers broad spectrum of blast resistance in rice. Theor Appl Genet  
    115:1163–1177. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00122- 007- 0642- x 
Jia Y, Valent B, Lee FN (2003) Determination of host responses to Magnaporthe grisea on detached  
    rice  leaves  using  a  spot  inoculation  method.  Plant  Dis  87:129–133.  https://doi.org/10.1094/ 
    PDIS.2003.87.2.129 
Jia Y, Correa-Victoria F, McClung A et al (2007) Rapid determination of rice cultivar responses to  
    the sheath blight pathogen Rhizoctonia solani using a micro-chamber screening method. Plant  
    Dis 91:485–489. https://doi.org/10.1094/PDIS- 91- 5- 0485 
Jia L, Yan W, Zhu C et al (2012) Allelic analysis of sheath blight resistance with association map- 
    ping in rice. PLoS One 7:e32703. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0032703 
Jiang W, Zhou H, Bi H et al (2013) Demonstration of CRISPR/Cas9/sgRNA-mediated targeted  
    gene modification in Arabidopsis , tobacco, sorghum and rice. Nucleic Acids Res 41:e188–e188 
Jiang J, Yang D, Ali J, Mou T (2015) Molecular marker-assisted pyramiding of broad-spectrum  
    disease resistance genes, Pi2 and Xa23 , into GZ63-4S, an elite thermo-sensitive genic male-  
    sterile line in rice. Mol Breed 35:1–12. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11032- 015- 0282- 9 
Jiang N, Yan J, Liang Y et al (2020) Resistance genes and their interactions with bacterial blight/ 
    leaf  streak  pathogens  (Xanthomonas  oryzae)  in  rice  (Oryza  sativa  L.)—an  updated  review.  
    Rice 13:3. https://doi.org/10.1186/s12284- 019- 0358- y 
Jinek M, Chylinski K, Fonfara I et al (2012) A programmable dual-RNA-guided DNA endonuclease  
    in adaptive bacterial immunity. Science 337:816–821. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1225829 
Jones JDG, Dangl JL (2006) The plant immune system. Nature 444:323–329 
Joseph M, Gopalakrishnan S, Sharma RK et al (2004) Combining bacterial blight resistance and  
    Basmati quality characteristics by phenotypic and molecular marker-assisted selection in rice.  
    Mol Breed 13:377–387. https://doi.org/10.1023/B:MOLB.0000034093.63593.4c 
Ju Y, Tian H, Zhang R et al (2017) Overexpression of OsHSP18.0-CI enhances resistance to bacte- 
    rial leaf streak in rice. Rice 10:12. https://doi.org/10.1186/s12284- 017- 0153- 6 
Kauffman HE, Reddy APK, Hsieh SPY, Merca SD (1973) An improved technique for evaluating  
    resistance of rice varieties to Xanthomonas oryzae . Plant Dis Rep 57:537–541 

----------------------- Page 380-----------------------

370                                                                                 M. Jamaloddin et al. 

Kaur Y (2014) Development of screening technique for false smut of rice. Dissertation. Punjab  
    Agricultural University, Ludhiana 
Kaur T, Singh I (2017) Standardization of screening technique for false smut of rice. Progress  
    Agric 17:10. https://doi.org/10.5958/0976- 4615.2017.00007.2 
Kaur  S,  Padmanabhan  SY,  Kaur  P  (1979)  Effect  of  nitrogen  on  the  intracellular  spread  of  
    Pyricularia oryzae. Indian Phytopathol 32:285–286 
Ke Y, Deng H, Wang S (2017) Advances in understanding broad-spectrum resistance to pathogens  
    in rice. Plant J 90:738–748. https://doi.org/10.1111/tpj.13438 
Khush GS (2005) What it will take to feed 5.0 billion rice consumers in 2030. Plant Mol Biol 59:1–6 
Khush GS, Angeles ER (1999) A new gene for resistance to race 6 of bacterial blight in rice, Oryza  
    sativa. Rice Genet Newsl 16:92–93 
Kim  SM  (2018)  Identification  of  novel  recessive  gene  xa44(t)  conferring  resistance  to  bacte- 
    rial  blight  races  in  rice  by  QTL  linkage  analysis  using  an  SNP  chip.  Theor  Appl  Genet  
    131:2733–2743. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00122- 018- 3187- 2 
Kim SM, Reinke RF (2019) A novel resistance gene for bacterial blight in rice, Xa43(t) identified  
    by GWAS, confirmed by QTL mapping using a bi-parental population. PLoS One 14:e0211775.  
    https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0211775 
Kim YG,  Cha  J,  Chandrasegaran  S  (1996)  Hybrid  restriction  enzymes:  zinc  finger  fusions  to  
    Fok  I  cleavage  domain.  Proc  Natl Acad  Sci  U  S A  93:1156–1160.  https://doi.org/10.1073/ 
    pnas.93.3.1156 
Kim SM, Suh JP, Qin Y et al (2015) Identification and fine-mapping of a new resistance gene,  
    Xa40 , conferring resistance to bacterial blight races in rice (Oryza sativa L.). Theor Appl Genet  
    128:1933–1943. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00122- 015- 2557- 2 
Kim YA,  Moon  H,  Park  CJ  (2019)  CRISPR/Cas9-targeted  mutagenesis  of  Os8N3  in  rice  to  
    confer  resistance  to  Xanthomonas  oryzae  pv.  oryzae.  Rice  12:67.  https://doi.org/10.1186/ 
    s12284- 019- 0325- 7 
Kinoshita T, Kiyosawa S (1997) Some considerations on linkage relationships between Pii and Piz  
    in the blast resistance of rice. Rice Genet Newsl 14:57–59 
Klug  A,  Schwabe  JWR  (1995)  Zinc  fingers.  FASEB  J  9:597–604.  https://doi.org/10.1096/ 
    fasebj.9.8.7768350 
Koonin EV, Makarova KS (2019) Origins and evolution of CRISPR-Cas systems. Philos Trans R  
    Soc B Biol Sci 374:20180087 
Korinsak S, Sriprakhon S, Sirithanya P et al (2009) Identification of microsatellite markers (SSR)  
    linked to a new bacterial blight-resistance gene xa33(t) in rice cultivar “Ba7”. Maejo Int J Sci  
    Technol 3:235–247 
Kou Y, Wang  S  (2013)  Bacterial  blight  resistance  in  rice.  In:  Translational  genomics  for  crop  
    breeding. John Wiley & Sons Ltd., Chichester, pp 11–30 
Kurata N, Yamazaki Y (2006) Oryzabase:an integrated biological and genome information data- 
    base for rice. Plant Physiol 140:12–17. https://doi.org/10.1104/pp.105.063008 
Lee  KS,  Rasabandith  S,  Angeles  ER,  Khush  GS  (2003)  Inheritance  of  resistance  to  bacte- 
    rial  blight  in  21  cultivars  of  rice.  Phytopathology  93:147–152.  https://doi.org/10.1094/ 
    PHYTO.2003.93.2.147 
Lee  SK,  Song  MY,  Seo YS  et  al  (2009)  Rice  Pi5-mediated  resistance  to Magnaporthe  oryzae  
    requires the presence of two coiled-coil-nucleotide-binding-leucine-rich repeat genes. Genetics  
    181:1627–1638. https://doi.org/10.1534/genetics.108.099226 
Lee  JH,  Muhsin  M, Atienza  GA  et  al  (2010)  Single  nucleotide  polymorphisms  in  a  gene  for  
    translation  initiation  factor  (elF4G)  of  rice  (Oryza  sativa)  associated  with  resistance  to  
    rice  tungro  spherical  virus.  Mol  Plant-Microbe  Interact  23:29–38.  https://doi.org/10.1094/ 
    MPMI- 23- 1- 0029 
Lei C, Huang D, Li W et al (2005) Molecular mapping of a blast resistance gene in an indica rice  
    cultivar Yanxian No. 1. Rice Genet Newsl 22:76–77 
Li  T,  Liu  B,  Spalding  MH  et  al  (2012)  High-efficiency  TALEN-based  gene  editing  produces  
    disease- resistant rice. Nat Biotechnol 30:390 

----------------------- Page 381-----------------------

Molecular Approaches for Disease Resistance in Rice                                                        371 

Li Z, Fu BY, Gao YM et al (2014) The 3,000 rice genomes project. Giga Sci 3:7. https://doi.org/1 
    0.1186/2047- 217X- 3- 7 
Li M, Li X, Zhou Z et al (2016) Reassessment of the four yield-related genes Gn1a, DEP1, GS3,  
    and IPA1 in rice using a CRISPR/Cas9 system. Front Plant Sci 7:377 
Li C, Wang D, Peng S et al (2019a) Genome-wide association mapping of resistance against rice  
    blast  strains  in  South  China  and  identification  of  a  new  Pik  allele.  Rice  12:47.  https://doi. 
    org/10.1186/s12284- 019- 0309- 7 
Li W, Chern M, Yin J et al (2019b) Recent advances in broad-spectrum resistance to the rice blast  
    disease. Curr Opin Plant Biol 50:114–120 
Liakos  KG,  Busato  P,  Moshou  D  et  al  (2018)  Machine  learning  in  agriculture:  a  review.  
    Sensors 18:2674 
Lin F, Chen S, Que Z et al (2007) The blast resistance gene Pi37 encodes a nucleotide binding site-  
    leucine- rich repeat protein and is a member of a resistance gene cluster on rice chromosome 1.  
    Genetics 177:1871–1880. https://doi.org/10.1534/genetics.107.080648 
Lin  Q,  Zong Y,  Xue  C  et  al  (2020)  Prime  genome  editing  in  rice  and  wheat.  Nat  Biotechnol  
    38:582–585. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41587- 020- 0455- x 
Liu XQ, Wang L, Chen S et al (2005) Genetic and physical mapping of Pi36(t), a novel rice blast  
    resistance gene located on rice chromosome 8. Mol Gen Genomics 274:394–401. https://doi. 
    org/10.1007/s00438- 005- 0032- 5 
Liu X, Yang Q, Lin F et al (2007) Identification and fine-mapping of Pi39(t), a major gene confer- 
    ring the broad-spectrum resistance to Magnaporthe oryzae . Mol Gen Genomics 278:403–410.  
    https://doi.org/10.1007/s00438- 007- 0258- 5 
Liu W, Jin S, Zhu X et al (2008) Improving blast resistance of a thermo-sensitive genic male ster- 
    ile rice line GD-8S by molecular marker-assisted selection. Rice Sci 15:179–185. https://doi. 
    org/10.1016/S1672- 6308(08)60040- 2 
Liu Q, Yuan M, Zhou Y et al (2011) A paralog of the MtN3/saliva family recessively confers race-  
    specific resistance to Xanthomonas oryzae in rice. Plant Cell Environ 34:1958–1969. https:// 
    doi.org/10.1111/j.1365- 3040.2011.02391.x 
Liu G, Jia Y, McClung A et al (2013) Confirming QTLs and finding additional loci responsible  
    for  resistance  to  rice  sheath  blight  disease.  Plant  Dis  97:113–117.  https://doi.org/10.1094/ 
    PDIS- 05- 12- 0466- RE 
Liu  W,  Liu  J,  Triplett  L  et  al  (2014)  Novel  insights  into  rice  innate  immunity  against  bacte- 
    rial  and  fungal  pathogens.  Annu  Rev  Phytopathol  52:213–241.  https://doi.org/10.1146/ 
    annurev- phyto- 102313- 045926 
Liu MH, Kang H, Xu Y et al (2020) Genome-wide association study identifies an NLR gene that  
    confers partial resistance to Magnaporthe oryzae in rice. Plant Biotechnol J 18:1376–1383.  
    https://doi.org/10.1111/pbi.13300 
Lu Y, Zhu JK (2017) Precise editing of a target base in the rice genome using a modified CRISPR/ 
    Cas9 system. Mol Plant 10:523–525 
Lu Z, Yu X, Heong K, Cui HU (2007) Effect of nitrogen fertilizer on herbivores and its stimulation  
    to major insect pests in rice. Rice Sci 14:56–66 
Ma J, Lei C, Xu X et al (2015a) Pi64, encoding a novel CC-NBS-LRR protein, confers resistance  
    to leaf and neck blast in rice. Mol Plant-Microbe Interact 28:558–568. https://doi.org/10.1094/ 
    MPMI- 11- 14- 0367- R 
Ma X, Zhang Q, Zhu Q et al (2015b) A robust CRISPR/Cas9 system for convenient, high- efficiency  
    multiplex genome editing in monocot and dicot plants. Mol Plant 8:1274–1284.  https://doi. 
    org/10.1016/j.molp.2015.04.007 
Mackill DJ, Coffman WR, Garrity DP (1996) Rainfed lowland rice improvement. International  
    Rice Research Institute, Los Baños. 242 p 
Macovei A, Sevilla NR, Cantos C et al (2018) Novel alleles of rice eIF4G generated by CRISPR/ 
    Cas9-targeted mutagenesis confer resistance to Rice tungro spherical virus. Plant Biotechnol J  
    16:1918–1927. https://doi.org/10.1111/pbi.12927 

----------------------- Page 382-----------------------

372                                                                               M. Jamaloddin et al. 

Madamba MRS, Sugiyama N, Bordeos A et al (2009) A recessive mutation in rice conferring non-  
    race- specific resistance to bacterial blight and blast. Rice 2:104–114. https://doi.org/10.1007/ 
    s12284- 009- 9027- x 
Mahadevaiah C, Hittalmani S, Uday G, Kumar MKP (2015) Standardization of disease screening  
    protocol for sheath rot disease in rice. Int J Agric Sci Res 5:129–137 
Mahadevaiah C, Kumar MP, Hittalmani S (2017) Dissecting parameters associated with sheath  
    rot (Sarocladium oryzae [(Sawada) W. Gams &D. Hawksw.]) disease in rice (Oryza sativa L.).  
    Curr Sci 112:151–155. https://doi.org/10.18520/cs/v112/i01/151- 155 
Mahesh  HB,  Shirke  MD,  Singh  S  et  al  (2016)  Indica  rice  genome  assembly,  annotation  and  
    mining  of  blast  disease-resistance  genes.  BMC  Genomics  17:242.  https://doi.org/10.1186/ 
    s12864- 016- 2523- 7 
Mangrauthia SK, Maliha A, Prathi NB, Marathi B (2017) MicroRNAs: potential target for genome  
    editing in plants for traits improvement. Indian J Plant Physiol 22:530–548 
Manosalva PM, Davidson RM, Liu B et al (2009) A germin-like protein gene family functions as  
    a complex quantitative trait locus conferring broad-spectrum disease resistance in rice. Plant  
    Physiol 149:286–296. https://doi.org/10.1104/pp.108.128348 
Matsumoto T, Wu J, Kanamori H et al (2005) The map-based sequence of the rice genome. Nature  
    436:793–800. https://doi.org/10.1038/nature03895 
Matsuyama N (1973) Effect of nitrogenous fertilizer on biochemical processes that could affect  
    lesion size of rice blast. Phytopathology 63:1202–1203 
McCouch S, Nelson R, Tohme J, Zeigler R (1994) Mapping of blast resistance genes in rice. In:  
    Zeigler RS, Leong SA, Teng PS (eds) Rice blast disease. CAB International, Wallingford, UK,  
    pp 167–186 
Meuwissen THE, Hayes BJ, Goddard ME (2001) Prediction of total genetic value using genome-  
    wide dense marker maps. Genetics 157:1819–1829 
Miah G, Rafii M, Ismail M et al (2013) A review of microsatellite markers and their applications  
    in rice breeding programs to improve blast disease resistance. Int J Mol Sci 14:22499–22528 
Miao LL, Wang CL, Zheng CK et al (2010) Molecular mapping of a new gene for resistance to rice  
    bacterial blight. Sci Agric Sin 43:2611 
Milovanovic V, Smutka L (2017) Asian countries in the global rice market. Acta Univ Agric Silvic  
    Mendel Brun 65:679–688 
Mishra R, Joshi RK, Zhao K (2018) Genome editing in rice: recent advances, challenges, and  
    future implications. Front Plant Sci 9:1361 
Molla KA, Karmakar S, Molla J et al (2020) Understanding sheath blight resistance in rice: the road  
    behind and the road ahead. Plant Biotechnol J 18:895–915. https://doi.org/10.1111/pbi.13312 
Moon SB, Kim DY, Ko JH, Kim YS (2019) Recent advances in the CRISPR genome editing tool  
    set. Exp Mol Med 51:1–11 
Moscou MJ, Bogdanove AJ (2009) A simple cipher governs DNA recognition by TAL effectors.  
    Science 326:1501. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1178817 
Mur LAJ, Simpson C, Kumari A et al (2017) Moving nitrogen to the centre of plant defense against  
    pathogens. Ann Bot 119:703–709 
Mushtaq M, Sakina A, Wani SH et al (2019) Harnessing genome editing techniques to engineer  
    disease resistance in plants. Front Plant Sci 10:550 
Mvuyekure SM, Sibiya J, Derera J et al (2017) Genetic analysis of mechanisms associated with  
    inheritance of resistance to sheath rot of rice. Plant Breed 136:509–515. https://doi.org/10.1111/ 
    pbr.12492 
Nakamura S, Asakawa S, Ohmido N et al (1997) Construction of an 800-kb contig in the near-  
    centromeric region of the rice blast resistance gene Pi-ta2 using a highly representative rice  
    BAC library. Mol Gen Genet 254:611–620. https://doi.org/10.1007/s004380050459 
Naqvi NI, Bonman JM, Mackill DJ et al (1995) Identification of RAPD markers linked to a major  
    blast resistance gene in rice. Mol Breed 1:341–348. https://doi.org/10.1007/BF01248411 
Neelam K, Mahajan R, Gupta V et al (2020) High-resolution genetic mapping of a novel bacterial  
    blight-  resistance  gene  xa-45(t)  identified  from  Oryza  glaberrima  and  transferred  to  Oryza  
    sativa. Theor Appl Genet 133:689–705. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00122- 019- 03501- 2 

----------------------- Page 383-----------------------

Molecular Approaches for Disease Resistance in Rice                                                      373 

Nelson JC, Oard JH, Groth D et al (2012) Sheath-blight resistance QTLs in japonica rice germ- 
    plasm. Euphytica 184:23–34. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10681- 011- 0475- 1 
Ning D, Song A, Fan F et al (2014) Effects of slag-based silicon fertilizer on rice growth and  
    brown-spot resistance. PLoS One 9:e102681 
Nürnberger  T,  Kemmerling  B  (2009)  PAMP-triggered  basal  immunity  in  plants.  Adv  Bot  
    Res 51:1–38 
Ogawa T (1988) Near-isogenic lines as international differentials for resistance to bacterial blight  
    of rice. Rice Genet Newsl 5:106 
Ogawa T (2008) Monitoring race distribution and identification of genes for resistance to bacterial  
    leaf blight. Rice Genet III 3:456–459 
Ogawa T, Lin L, Tabien RE et al (1987) A new recessive gene for resistance to bacterial blight of  
    rice. Rice Genet Newsl 4:98 
Okuyama Y, Kanzaki H, Abe A et al (2011) A multifaceted genomics approach allows the isolation  
    of the rice Pia-blast resistance gene consisting of two adjacent NBS-LRR protein genes. Plant  
    J 66:467–479. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1365- 313X.2011.04502.x 
Oliva  R,  Ji  C,  Atienza-Grande  G  et  al  (2019)  Broad-spectrum  resistance  to  bacterial  blight  
    in   rice   using   genome   editing.   Nat   Biotechnol   37:1344–1350.   https://doi.org/10.1038/ 
    s41587- 019- 0267- z 
Oliver RP, Ipcho SVS (2004) Arabidopsis pathology breathes new life into the necrotrophs-vs.- 
    biotrophs classification of fungal pathogens. Mol Plant Pathol 5:347–352 
Oreiro EG, Grimares EK, Atienza-Grande G et al (2019) Genome-wide associations and transcrip- 
    tional profiling reveal ROS regulation as one underlying mechanism of sheath blight resistance  
    in rice. Mol Plant-Microbe Interact 33:212–222. https://doi.org/10.1094/MPMI- 05- 19- 0141- R 
Pan Q, Tanisaka T (1997) Studies on the genetics and breeding of blast resistance in rice. VII. Gene  
    analysis for the blast resistance of Indian native cultivar, Aus 373. Breed Sci 47:35 
Pan Q, Wang L, Ikehashi H, Tanisaka T (1996) Identification of a new blast resistance gene in  
    the  indica  rice  cultivar  Kasalath  using  Japanese  differential  cultivars  and  isozyme  markers.  
    Phytopathology 86:1071–1075 
Panda  KK,  Mishra  MK  (2019)  Studies  on  physiological  characteristics  of  Sarocladium  oryzae  
    causing sheath rot of rice. Int J Curr Microbiol App Sci 8:1767–1774. https://doi.org/10.20546/ 
    ijcmas.2019.808.209 
Panguluri  SK,  Kumar AA  (2013)  Phenotyping  for  plant  breeding:  applications  of  phenotyping  
    methods for crop improvement. Springer, New York 
Park DS, Sayler RJ, Hong YG et al (2008) A method for inoculation and evaluation of rice sheath  
    blight disease. Plant Dis 92:25–29. https://doi.org/10.1094/PDIS- 92- 1- 0025 
Peeters KJ, Haeck A, Harinck L et al (2020) Morphological, pathogenic and toxigenic variabil- 
    ity  in  the  rice  sheath  rot  pathogen  Sarocladium  oryzae.  Toxins  (Basel)  12:109.  https://doi. 
    org/10.3390/toxins12020109 
Perez-de-Castro A, Vilanova S, Canizares J et al (2012) Application of genomic tools in plant  
    breeding. Curr Genom 13:179–195. https://doi.org/10.2174/138920212800543084 
Petpisit V, Khush GS, Kauffman HE (1977) Inheritance of resistance to bacterial blight in rice. 1.  
    Crop Sci 17:551–554. https://doi.org/10.2135/cropsci1977.0011183x001700040018x 
Qu  S,  Liu  G,  Zhou  B  et  al  (2006)  The  broad-spectrum  blast  resistance  gene  Pi9  encodes  a  
    nucleotide- binding site-leucine-rich repeat protein and is a member of a multigene family in  
    rice. Genetics 172:1901–1914. https://doi.org/10.1534/genetics.105.044891 
Rajashekara  H,  Ellur  RK,  Khanna A  et  al  (2014)  Inheritance  of  blast  resistance  and  its  allelic  
    relationship  with  five  major  R-genes  in  a  rice  landrace  “Vanasurya”.  Indian  Phytopathol  
    67:365–369 
Rajpurohit D, Kumar R, Kumar M et al (2011) Pyramiding of two bacterial blight resistance and a  
    semidwarfing gene in Type 3 Basmati using marker-assisted selection. Euphytica 178:111–126.  
    https://doi.org/10.1007/s10681- 010- 0279- 8 
Ramirez CL, Foley JE, Wright DA et al (2008) Unexpected failure rates for modular assembly of  
    engineered zinc fingers. Nat Methods 5:374–375 

----------------------- Page 384-----------------------

374                                                                                 M. Jamaloddin et al. 

Rathna Priya TS, Eliazer Nelson ARL, Ravichandran K, Antony U (2019) Nutritional and func- 
    tional properties of coloured rice varieties of South India: a review. J Ethn Foods 6:11 
Raven JA (2003) Cycling silicon: the role of accumulation in plants. New Phytol 158:419–421 
Read AC, Moscou MJ, Zimin AV et al (2020) Genome assembly and characterization of a com- 
    plex  zfBED-NLR  gene-containing  disease  resistance  locus  in  Carolina  Gold  Select  rice  
    with   Nanopore     sequencing.    PLoS    Genet    16:e1008571.   https://doi.org/10.1371/journal. 
    pgen.1008571 
Reddy APK, Katyal JC, Rouse DI, MacKenzie DR (1979) Relationship between nitrogen fertiliza- 
    tion, bacterial leaf blight severity and yield of rice. Phytopathology 69:970–973 
Rekha G, Abhilash Kumar V, Viraktamath BC et al (2018) Improvement of blast resistance of  
    the  popular  high-yielding,  medium  slender-grain  type,  bacterial  blight-resistant  rice  vari- 
    ety,  Improved  Samba  Mahsuri  by  marker-assisted  breeding.  J  Plant  Biochem  Biotechnol  
    27:463–472. https://doi.org/10.1007/s13562- 018- 0455- 9 
Robichaux  CR  (2001)  The  effect  of  calcium  silicate  on  rice  yield  and  sheath  blight  disease.  
    Fitopatol Bras 30:457–469 
Romero FM, Gatica-Arias A (2019) CRISPR/Cas9: development and application in rice breeding.  
    Rice Sci 26:265–281 
Sallaud C, Lorieux M, Roumen E et al (2003) Identification of five new blast resistance genes in  
    the highly blast-resistant rice variety IR64 using a QTL mapping strategy. Theor Appl Genet  
    106:794–803. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00122- 002- 1088- 9 
Samiyappan  R,  Amutha  G,  Kandan  A  et  al  (2003)  Purification  and  partial  characterization  
    of  a  phytotoxin  produced  by  Sarocladium  oryzae,  the  rice  sheath  rot  pathogen  (Reinigung  
    und  partielle  charakterisierung  eines  vom  reisblattscheidenfäule-pathogen  sarocladium  ory- 
    zae  erzeugten  phytoto). Arch  Phytopathol  Plant  Protect  36:247–256.  https://doi.org/10.108 
    0/03235400310001617879 
Sanchez AC, Brar DS, Huang N et al (2000) Sequence tagged site marker-assisted selection for  
    three bacterial blight-resistance genes in rice. Crop Sci 40:792–797. https://doi.org/10.2135/ 
    cropsci2000.403792x 
Savary S, Willocquet L, Pethybridge SJ et al (2019) The global burden of pathogens and pests on  
    major food crops. Nat Ecol Evol 3:430–439. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41559- 018- 0793- y 
Sebastian LS, Ikeda R, Huang N et al (1996) Molecular mapping of resistance to rice tungro spheri- 
    cal virus and green leafhopper. Phytopathology 86:25–30. https://doi.org/10.1094/Phyto- 86- 25 
Serrano M, Coluccia F, Torres M et al (2014) The cuticle and plant defense to pathogens. Front  
    Plant Sci 5:274. https://doi.org/10.3389/fpls.2014.00274 
Shan  Q,  Zhang Y,  Chen  K  et  al  (2015)  Creation  of  fragrant  rice  by  targeted  knockout  of  the  
    OsBADH2  gene  using  TALEN  technology.  Plant  Biotechnol  J  13:791–800.  https://doi. 
    org/10.1111/pbi.12312 
Shanti  ML,  Kumar  Varm  CM,  Premalatha  P  et  al  (2010)  Understanding  the  bacterial  blight  
    pathogen- combining pathotyping and molecular marker studies. Int J Plant Pathol 1:58–68.  
    https://doi.org/10.3923/ijpp.2010.58.68 
Sharma S, Duveiller E, Basnet R et al (2005a) Effect of potash fertilization on Helminthosporium  
    leaf blight severity in wheat, and associated increases in grain yield and kernel weight. Field  
    Crop Res 93:142–150 
Sharma TR, Madhav MS, Singh BK et al (2005b) High-resolution mapping, cloning and molecular  
    characterization of the Pi-kh gene of rice, which confers resistance to  Magnaporthe grisea .  
    Mol Gen Genomics 274:569–578. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00438- 005- 0035- 2 
Sharma TR, Rai AK, Gupta SK et al (2012) Rice blast management through host-plant resistance:  
    retrospect and prospects. Agric Res 1:37–52 
Shen C, Que Z, Xia Y et al (2017) Knock out of the annexin gene  OsAnn3 via CRISPR/Cas9-  
    mediated genome editing decreased cold tolerance in rice. J Plant Biol 60:539–547 
Shinoda H, Toriyama K, Yunoki T et al (1971) Studies on the varietal resistance of rice to blast. 6.  
    Linkage relationship of blast resistance genes. Jpn Chugoku Nogyo Shikengo Fukuyama Bull  
    Ser A 20:1 

----------------------- Page 385-----------------------

Molecular Approaches for Disease Resistance in Rice                                                375 

Sidhu GS, Khush GS, Mew TW (1978) Genetic analysis of bacterial blight-resistance in seventy-  
    four cultivars of rice, Oryza sativa L. Theor Appl Genet 53:105–111. https://doi.org/10.1007/ 
    BF00272687 
Sime HD, Mbong GA, Malla DK, Suh C (2017) Effect of different doses of NPK fertilizer on the  
    infection coefficient of rice (Orysa sativa L.) blast in Ndop, North West of Cameroon. Agron  
    Afr 29:245–255 
Singh S, Sidhu JS, Huang N et al (2001) Pyramiding three bacterial blight-resistance genes (xa5,  
    xa13 and Xa21) using marker-assisted selection into indica rice cultivar PR106. Theor Appl  
    Genet 102:1011–1015. https://doi.org/10.1007/s001220000495 
Singh PK, Nag A, Arya P et al (2018) Prospects of understanding the molecular biology of disease  
    resistance in rice. Int J Mol Sci 19:1141 
Song WY, Wang GL, Chen LL et al (1995) A receptor kinase-like protein encoded by the rice dis- 
    ease resistance gene, Xa21 . Science 270:1804. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.270.5243.1804 
Stein JC, Yu Y, Copetti D et al (2018) Genomes of 13 domesticated and wild rice relatives highlight  
    genetic conservation, turnover and innovation across the genus Oryza. Nat Genet 50:285–296.  
    https://doi.org/10.1038/s41588- 018- 0040- 0 
Streubel J, Pesce C, Hutin M et al (2013) Five phylogenetically close rice  SWEET genes con- 
    fer  TAL  effector-mediated  susceptibility  to  Xanthomonas  oryzae  pv.  oryzae.  New  Phytol  
    200:808–819. https://doi.org/10.1111/nph.12411 
Su J, Wang W, Han J et al (2015) Functional divergence of duplicated genes results in a novel blast  
    resistance gene Pi50 at the Pi2/9 locus. Theor Appl Genet 128:2213–2225 
Suh J-P, Noh T-H, Kim K-Y et al (2009) Expression levels of three bacterial blight-resistance genes  
    against K3a race of Korea by molecular and phenotype analysis in japonica rice (O. sativa L.).  
    J Crop Sci Biotechnol 12:103–108. https://doi.org/10.1007/s12892- 009- 0103- y 
Sun W, Zhang J, Fan Q et al (2010) Silicon-enhanced resistance to rice blast is attributed to silicon-  
    mediated defense resistance and its role as physical barrier. Eur J Plant Pathol 128:39–49 
Sun Y, Zhang X, Wu C et al (2016) Engineering herbicide-resistant rice plants through CRISPR/ 
    Cas9-mediated homologous recombination of acetolactate synthase. Mol Plant 9:628–631 
Sun Q, Liu X, Yang J et al (2018) MicroRNA528 affects lodging resistance of maize by regulating  
    lignin biosynthesis under nitrogen-luxury conditions. Mol Plant 11:806–814 
Sun Y, Wang M, Mur LAJ et al (2020) Unravelling the roles of nitrogen nutrition in plant disease  
    defenses. Int J Mol Sci 21:572 
Sundaram RM, Vishnupriya MR, Biradar SK et al (2008) Marker-assisted introgression of bacte- 
    rial blight resistance in Samba Mahsuri, an elite indica rice variety. Euphytica 160:411–422.  
    https://doi.org/10.1007/s10681- 007- 9564- 6 
Sundaram RM, Vishnupriya MR, Laha GS et al (2009) Introduction of bacterial blight resistance  
    into Triguna, a high-yielding, mid-early duration rice variety. Biotechnol J 4:400–407. https:// 
    doi.org/10.1002/biot.200800310 
Swathi G, Durga Rani CV, Md J et al (2019) Marker-assisted introgression of the major bacterial  
    blight- resistance genes, Xa21 and xa13, and blast resistance gene, Pi54, into the popular rice  
    variety, JGL1798. Mol Breed 39:1–12. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11032- 019- 0950- 2 
Tabien RE, Li Z, Paterson AH et al (2002) Mapping QTLs for field resistance to the rice blast  
    pathogen  and  evaluating  their  individual  and  combined  utility  in  improved  varieties. Theor  
    Appl Genet 105:313–324. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00122- 002- 0940- 2 
Taguchi-Shiobara F, Ozaki H, Sato H et al (2013) Mapping and validation of QTLs for rice sheath  
    blight resistance. Breed Sci 63:301–308. https://doi.org/10.1270/jsbbs.63.301 
Takagi H, Abe A, Yoshida K et al (2013a) QTL-seq: rapid mapping of quantitative trait loci in rice  
    by whole- genome resequencing of DNA from two bulked populations. Plant J 74:174–183 
Takagi  H,  Uemura A, Yaegashi  H  et  al  (2013b)  MutMap-Gap:  whole-genome  resequencing  of  
    mutant F2 progeny bulk combined with  de novo assembly of gap regions identifies the rice  
    blast-resistance gene Pii. New Phytol 200:276–283. https://doi.org/10.1111/nph.12369 
Takahashi W, Miura Y, Sasaki T (2009) A novel inoculation method for evaluation of grey leaf spot  
    resistance in Italian ryegrass. J Plant Pathol 91:171–176. https://doi.org/10.4454/jpp.v91i1.638 

----------------------- Page 386-----------------------

376                                                                                     M. Jamaloddin et al. 

Tan GX, Ren X, Weng QM et al (2004) Mapping of a new resistance gene to bacterial blight in rice  
    line introgressed from Oryza officinalis. Acta Genet Sin 31:724–729 
Tang D, Wu W, Li W et al (2000) Mapping of QTLs conferring resistrance to bacterial leaf streak  
    in rice. Theor Appl Genet 101:286–291. https://doi.org/10.1007/s001220051481 
Tang L, Mao B, Li Y et al (2017) Knockout of  OsNramp5 using the CRISPR/Cas9 system pro- 
    duces low Cd-accumulating indica rice without compromising yield. Sci Rep 7:14438. https:// 
    doi.org/10.1038/s41598- 017- 14832- 9 
Tanksley SD, Young ND, Paterson AH, Bonierbale MW (1989) RFLP mapping in plant breeding:  
    new tools for an old science. Bio/Technology 7:257–264. https://doi.org/10.1038/nbt0389- 257 
Tanweer FA, Rafii MY, Sijam K et al (2015) Current advance methods for the identification of blast  
    resistance genes in rice. C R Biol 338:321–334. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.crvi.2015.03.001 
Tena G, Boudsocq M, Sheen J (2011) Protein kinase signaling networks in plant innate immunity.  
    Curr Opin Plant Biol 14:519–529 
Teng Q, Hu X-F, Chang Y-Y et al (2016) Effects of different fertilisers on rice resistance to pests  
    and diseases. Soil Res 54:242–253 
Thakur M, Sohal BS (2013) Role of elicitors in inducing resistance in plants against pathogen  
    infection: a review. Int Sch Res Not 2013:762412 
Tonnessen  BW,  Manosalva  P,  Lang  JM  et  al  (2015)  Rice  phenylalanine  ammonia-lyase  gene  
    OsPAL4  is  associated  with  broad  spectrum  disease  resistance.  Plant  Mol  Biol  87:273–286.  
    https://doi.org/10.1007/s11103- 014- 0275- 9 
Vassilev D, Leunissen J, Atanassov A et al (2005) Application of bioinformatics in plant breeding.  
    Biotechnol Biotechnol Equip 19:139. https://doi.org/10.1080/13102818.2005.10817293 
Vikal   Y,   Chawla     H,   Sharma     R   et   al  (2014)    Mapping      of  bacterial   blight-resistance  
    gene  xa8   in   rice   (Oryza   sativa   L.).   Indian   J   Genet   Plant   Breed   74:589.   https://doi. 
    org/10.5958/0975- 6906.2014.00895.5 
Wang GL, Mackill DJ, Bonman JM et al (1994) RFLP mapping of genes conferring complete and  
    partial resistance to blast in a durably resistant rice cultivar. Genetics 136:1421–1434 
Wang ZX, Yano M, Yamanouchi U et al (1999) The Pib gene for rice blast resistance belongs to  
    the nucleotide binding and leucine-rich repeat class of plant disease resistance genes. Plant J  
    19:55–64. https://doi.org/10.1046/j.1365- 313X.1999.00498.x 
Wang W, Zhai W, Luo M et al (2001) Chromosome landing at the bacterial blight-resistance gene  
    Xa4 locus using a deep coverage rice BAC library. Mol Gen Genet 265:118–125. https://doi. 
    org/10.1007/s004380000382 
Wang C, Wen G, Lin X et al (2009) Identification and fine-mapping of the new bacterial blight-  
    resistance  gene,  Xa31(t),  in  rice.  Eur  J  Plant  Pathol  123:235–240.  https://doi.org/10.1007/ 
    s10658- 008- 9356- 4 
Wang F, Wang C, Liu P et al (2016) Enhanced rice blast resistance by CRISPR/Cas9-targeted  
    mutagenesis of the ERF transcription factor gene OsERF922. PLoS One 11:e0154027 
Wang M, Wang S, Liang Z et al (2018) From genetic stock to genome editing: gene exploitation in  
    wheat. Trends Biotechnol 36:160–172 
Wang  L,  Zhao  L,  Zhang  X  et  al  (2019)  Large-scale  identification  and  functional  analysis  of  
    NLR genes in blast resistance in the Tetep rice genome sequence. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A  
    116:8479–18487. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1910229116 
Wen ZH, Zeng YX, Ji ZJ, Yang CD (2015) Mapping quantitative trait loci for sheath blight dis- 
    ease resistance in Yangdao 4 rice. Genet Mol Res 14:1636–1649. https://doi.org/10.4238/2015. 
    March.6.10 
Wu KS, Tanksley SD (1993) Abundance, polymorphism and genetic mapping of microsatellites in  
    rice. Mol Gen Genet 241:225–235. https://doi.org/10.1007/BF00280220 
Wu JL, Fan YY, Li DB et al (2005) Genetic control of rice blast resistance in the durably resis- 
    tant  cultivar  Gumei  2  against  multiple  isolates.  Theor  Appl  Genet  111:50–56.  https://doi. 
    org/10.1007/s00122- 005- 1971- 2 
Wu KS, Martinez C, Lentini Z et al (2008) Cloning a blast resistance gene by chromosome walk- 
    ing. Rice Genet III:669. https://doi.org/10.1142/97898128142789_0082 

----------------------- Page 387-----------------------

Molecular Approaches for Disease Resistance in Rice                                                       377 

Wu X, Yu Y, Baerson SR et al (2017) Interactions between nitrogen and silicon in rice and their  
    effects on resistance toward the brown planthopper Nilaparvata lugens . Front Plant Sci 8:28 
Xiang Y, Cao Y, Xu C et al (2006) Xa3 , conferring resistance for rice bacterial blight and encoding  
    a receptor kinase-like protein, is the same as Xa26 . Theor Appl Genet 113:1347–1355. https:// 
    doi.org/10.1007/s00122- 006- 0388- x 
Xu  Q,  Yuan  X,  Yu  H  et  al  (2011)  Mapping  quantitative  trait  loci  for  sheath  blight  resis- 
    tance   in   rice   using   double   haploid   population.   Plant   Breed   130:404–406.   https://doi. 
    org/10.1111/j.1439- 0523.2010.01806.x 
Xu X, Hayashi N, Wang CT et al (2014) Rice blast resistance gene Pikahei-1(t), a member of a  
    resistance gene cluster on chromosome 4, encodes a nucleotide-binding site and leucine-rich  
    repeat protein. Mol Breed 34:691–700. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11032- 014- 0067- 6 
Xu Z, Xu X, Gong Q et al (2019) Engineering broad-spectrum bacterial blight resistance by simul- 
    taneously disrupting variable TALE-binding elements of multiple susceptibility genes in rice.  
    Mol Plant 12:1434–1446. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.molp.2019.08.006 
Yadav S, Anuradha G, Kumar RR et al (2015) Identification of QTLs and possible candidate genes  
    conferring sheath blight resistance in rice (Oryza sativa L.). Springerplus 4:175.  https://doi. 
    org/10.1186/s40064- 015- 0954- 2 
Yoshimura  S, Yamanouchi  U,  Katayose Y  et  al  (1998)  Expression  of  Xa1 ,  a  bacterial  blight-  
    resistance  gene  in  rice,  is  induced  by  bacterial  inoculation.  Proc  Natl  Acad  Sci  U  S  A  
    95:1663–1668. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.95.4.1663 
Yu S, Ali J, Zhang C et al (2020) Correction to: Genomic breeding of green super rice varieties and  
    their deployment in Asia and Africa. Theor Appl Genet 133:1337 
Yuan  B,  Zhai  C, Wang W  et  al  (2011) The  Pik-p  resistance  to  Magnaporthe  oryzae  in  rice  is  
    mediated by a pair of closely linked CC-NBS-LRR genes. Theor Appl Genet 122:1017–1028.  
    https://doi.org/10.1007/s00122- 010- 1506- 3 
Yuan C, Yuxiang Z, Zhijuan J et al (2019) Identification of stable quantitative trait loci for sheath  
    blight resistance using recombinant inbred line. Rice Sci 26:331–338. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
    rsci.2019.08.007 
Yugander A, Sundaram RM, Ladhalakshmi D et al (2017) Virulence profiling of Xanthomonas ory- 
    zae pv. oryzae isolates, causing bacterial blight of rice in India. Eur J Plant Pathol 149:171–191.  
    https://doi.org/10.1007/s10658- 017- 1176- y 
Yugander A,  Sundaram  RM,  Singh  K  et  al  (2018)  Incorporation  of  the  novel  bacterial  blight-  
    resistance  gene  Xa38  into  the  genetic  background  of  elite  rice  variety  Improved  Samba  
    Mahsuri. PLoS One 13:e0198260. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0198260 
Zafar K, Sedeek KEM, Rao GS et al (2020) Genome editing technologies for rice improvement:  
    progress,  prospects,  and  safety  concerns.  Front  Genome  Ed  2:5.  https://doi.org/10.3389/ 
    fgeed.2020.00005 
Zenbayashi  K, Ashizawa T, Tani T,  Koizumi  S  (2002)  Mapping  of  the  QTL  (quantitative  trait  
    locus) conferring partial resistance to leaf blast in rice cultivar Chubu 32. Theor Appl Genet  
    104:547–552. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00122- 001- 0779- y 
Zeng YX, Xia LZ, Wen ZH et al (2015) Mapping resistant QTLs for rice sheath blight disease  
    with  a  doubled  haploid  population.  J  Integr  Agric  14:801–810.  https://doi.org/10.1016/ 
    S2095- 3119(14)60909- 6 
Zetsche B, Gootenberg JS, Abudayyeh OO et al (2015) Cpf1 is a single RNA-guided endonuclease  
    of a Class 2 CRISPR-Cas system. Cell 163:759–771. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2015.09.038 
Zhai  C,  Lin  F,  Dong  Z  et  al  (2011)  The  isolation  and  characterization  of  Pik,  a  rice  blast-  
    resistance gene which emerged after rice domestication. New Phytol 189:321–334. https://doi. 
    org/10.1111/j.1469- 8137.2010.03462.x 
Zhang Q, Wanf CL, Zhao KJ et al (2001) The effectiveness of advanced rice lines with new resis- 
    tance gene Xa23 to rice bacterial blight. Rice Genet Newsl 18:71–72 
Zhang H, Li G, Li W, Song F (2009) Transgenic strategies for improving rice disease resistance.  
    Afr J Biotechnol 8:1750–1757 

----------------------- Page 388-----------------------

378                                                                                 M. Jamaloddin et al. 

Zhang F, Zhuo DL, Zhang F et al (2015) Xa39 , a novel-dominant gene conferring broad-spectrum  
    resistance  to  Xanthomonas  oryzae  pv.  oryzae  in  rice.  Plant  Pathol  64:568–575.  https://doi. 
    org/10.1111/ppa.12283 
Zhang H, Zhang J, Lang Z et al (2017a) Genome editing: principles and applications for functional  
    genomics research and crop improvement. CRC Crit Rev Plant Sci 36:291–309 
Zhang W, Wu L, Ding Y et al (2017b) Nitrogen fertilizer application affects lodging resistance by  
    altering secondary cell wall synthesis in japonica rice (Oryza sativa). J Plant Res 130:859–871 
Zhao H, Wang X, Jia Y et al (2018) The rice blast-resistance gene Ptr encodes an atypical protein  
    required for broad-spectrum disease resistance. Nat Commun 9:1–12. https://doi.org/10.1038/ 
    s41467- 018- 04369- 4 
Zheng CK, Wang CL, Yu YJ et al (2009) Identification and molecular mapping of Xa32(t), a novel  
    resistance gene for bacterial blight (Xanthomonas oryzae pv. oryzae) in rice. Acta Agron Sin  
    35:1173–1180. https://doi.org/10.1016/S1875- 2780(08)60089- 9 
Zhou  JH,  Wang  JL,  Xu  JC  et  al  (2004)  Identification  and  mapping  of  a  rice  blast- resistance  
    gene   Pi-g(t)   in  the  cultivar   Guangchangzhan.       Plant  Pathol    53:191–196.   https://doi. 
    org/10.1111/j.0032- 0862.2004.00986.x 
Zhou B, Qu S, Liu G et al (2006) The eight amino-acid differences within three leucine-rich repeats  
    between Pi2 and Piz-t resistance proteins determine the resistance specificity to Magnaporthe  
    grisea. Mol Plant-Microbe Interact 19:1216–1228. https://doi.org/10.1094/MPMI- 19- 1216 
Zhou J, Peng Z, Long J et al (2015) Gene targeting by the TAL effector PthXo2 reveals cryptic  
    resistance gene for bacterial blight of rice. Plant J 82:632–643 
Zhou J, Deng K, Cheng Y et al (2017) CRISPR-Cas9 based genome editing reveals new insights  
    into microRNA function and regulation in rice. Front Plant Sci 8:1598. https://doi.org/10.3389/ 
    fpls.2017.01598 
Zhou X, Liao H, Chern M et al (2018) Loss of function of a rice TPR-domain RNA-binding protein  
    confers broad-spectrum disease resistance. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 115:3174–3179. https:// 
    doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1705927115 
Zhuang JY, Ma WB, Wu JL et al (2002) Mapping of leaf and neck blast-resistance genes with  
    resistance  gene  analog,  RAPD  and  RFLP  in  rice.  Euphytica  128:363–370.  https://doi.org/1 
    0.1023/A:1021272710294 
Zipfel C, Felix G (2005) Plants and animals: a different taste for microbes? Curr Opin Plant Biol  
    8:353–360 
Zuo S, Yin Y, Pan C et al (2013) Fine-mapping of qSB-11LE, the QTL that confers partial resis- 
    tance  to  rice  sheath  blight.  Theor  Appl  Genet  126:1257–1272.  https://doi.org/10.1007/ 
    s00122- 013- 2051- 7 
Zuo S, Zhang Y, Yin Y et al (2014) Fine-mapping of  qSB-9  TQ, a gene conferring major quan- 

    titative  resistance  to  rice  sheath  blight.  Mol  Breed  34:2191–2203.  https://doi.org/10.1007/ 
    s11032- 014- 0173- 5 

Open Access    This chapter is licensed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution 4.0  
International License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/), which permits use, sharing,  
adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give appropriate  
credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons license and  
indicate if changes were made. 
    The images or other third party material in this chapter are included in the chapter's Creative  
Commons license, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not  
included in the chapter's Creative Commons license and your intended use is not permitted by  
statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from  
the copyright holder. 

----------------------- Page 389-----------------------

Molecular Approaches for Insect Pest  
Management in Rice 

Jagadish S. Bentur, R. M. Sundaram, Satendra Kumar Mangrauthia,  
and Suresh Nair 

Abstract  This chapter focuses on the progress made in using molecular tools in  
understanding resistance in rice to insect pests and breeding rice for multiple and  
durable insect resistance. Currently, molecular markers are being extensively used  
to tag, map, introgress, and clone plant resistance genes against gall midge, plan- 
thoppers, and leafhoppers. Studies on cloned insect resistance genes are leading to  
a better understanding of plant defense against insect pests under different feeding  
guilds. While marker-assisted breeding is successfully tackling problems in durable  
and multiple pest resistance in rice, genomics of plants and insects has identified  
RNAi-based gene silencing as an alternative approach for conferring insect resis- 
tance. The use of these techniques in rice is in the developmental stage, with the  
main focus on brown planthopper and yellow stem borer. CRISPR-based genome  
editing  techniques  for  pest  control  in  plants  has  just  begun.  Insect  susceptibility  
genes  (negative  regulators  of  resistance  genes)  in  plants  are  apt  targets  for  this  
approach while gene drive in insect populations, as a tool to study rice-pest interac- 
tions, is another concept being tested. Transformation of crop plants with diverse  
insecticidal genes is a proven technology with potential for commercial success.  
Despite advances in the development and testing of transgenic rice for insect resis- 
tance,  no  insect-resistant  rice  cultivar  is  now  being  commercially  cultivated. An  
array of molecular tools is being used to study insect-rice interactions at transcrip- 
tome,  proteome,  metabolome,  mitogenome,  and  metagenome  levels,  especially  
with  reference  to  BPH  and  gall  midge,  and  such  studies  are  uncovering  new  
approaches for insect pest management and for understanding population genetics  
and phylogeography of rice pests. Thus, it is evident that the new knowledge being  
gained through these studies has provided us with new tools and information for  

J. S. Bentur (*)  
Agri Biotech Foundation, Hyderabad, Telangana, India  

R. M. Sundaram  
ICAR-Indian Institute of Rice Research, Hyderabad, Telangana, India  

S. K. Mangrauthia  
ICAR-Indian Institute of Rice Research, Hyderabad, Telangana, India  

S. Nair  
Plant-Insect Interaction Group, International Centre for Genetic Engineering and  
Biotechnology, New Delhi, India 

© The Author(s) 2021                                                                             379 
J. Ali, S. H. Wani (eds.), Rice Improvement,  
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-66530-2_11 

----------------------- Page 390-----------------------

380                                                                                J. S. Bentur et al. 

facing future challenges. However, what is also evident is that our attempts to man- 
age rice pests cannot be a one-time effort but must be a continuing one. 

Keywords  Insect resistance · Molecular markers · Marker-assisted breeding ·  
RNAi · Genome editing · Transgenic rice · Insect-plant interaction 

1     Introduction 

Insect pests of rice form a formidable biotic stress component and a significant pro- 
duction  constraint  across  the  globe. Although  more  than  200  insect  species  are  
reported to feed on rice plants, about a dozen of them are economically important in  
a specific rice ecosystem at a given time. Several of these have coevolved over thou- 
sands  of  years  along  with  their  host  and  many  have  no  alternate  host. The  pest  
complex of rice is represented by insects from all the feeding guilds, from defolia- 
tors, tissue borers, and sap-suckers to gall formers, and several of these are occupied  
by a complex of species (Heinrichs  1994). Most important among these are stem  
borers: yellow stem borer (YSB), Scirpophaga incertulas; striped stem borer (SSB),  
Chilo  suppressalis;  and  pink  stem  borer  (PSB),  Sesamia  inferens;  planthoppers:  
brown planthopper (BPH), Nilaparvata lugens ; white-backed planthopper (WBPH),  
Sogatella furcifera; and small brown planthopper (SBPH), Laodelphax striatellus ;  
leafhoppers: green leafhopper (GLH), Nephottetix virescens ; green rice leafhopper  
(GRL/GRH), Nephotettix cincticeps ; and zigzag leafhopper (ZLH), Recilia dorsa- 
lis; gall midges: Asian rice gall midge (ARGM), Orseolia oryzae; and African rice  
gall midge (AfRGM), Orseolia oryzivora; and leaffolders: Cnaphalocrocis medina- 
lis and Marasmia spp. Several other insects such as rice hispa, grain bugs, aphids,  
mealy bug, and stem fly are of minor or regional importance (Bentur 2010). 
    Several studies reported yield losses due to either a single pest or a complex of  
pests but most of them end up with either overestimating or underestimating the  
damage caused by these pests. Savary et al. (2000) critically studied yield losses  
caused by different pests under varying production environments and suggested that  
stem borer damage at heading stage accounted for 2.3% loss. They also noted that  
yield attrition from chronic injuries by stem borer deadheart damage and defoliation  
is underestimated. Although this study represented the macro-level scenario, micro-  
level yield losses due to any single or combination of insect pests can be high and  
deserves to be mitigated. Deutsch et al. (2018) predict future increases in yield loss  
in rice because of insect pests under the scenario of global warming. 
    Past experience has clearly shown that any unilateral approach based on chemi- 
cal control, plant resistance, biocontrol, or behavioral means with pheromones has  
not  provided  desirable  and  sustainable  solutions  to  pest  problems.  However,  an  
early lead in exploring host-plant resistance taken by the International Rice Research  
Institute and emulated by various national programs paved the way for breeding for  
insect resistance with exemplary success against pests such as striped stem borer,  

----------------------- Page 391-----------------------

Molecular Approaches for Insect Pest Management in Rice                                 381 

gall midge, and planthoppers. But the first wave of success was countered by the  
rapid evolution of virulent biotypes. With the recent advances in molecular biology  
and biotechnology, researchers now have a new set of tools with which they can  
address several problems at the molecular level and identify new strategies to over- 
come old problems. In this chapter, we examine progress made through the classical  
approach and how the limitations of classical approach-based insect resistance and  
breeding for multiple and durable insect resistance in rice are being overcome with  
molecular marker-based approaches. In addition, we attempt to present the future  
scenario  of  genomics-based  tools  that  may  provide  novel  strategies  of  pest  
management. 

2     Classical Approach Through Host-Plant Resistance  
     Gene Deployment 

Following the seminal publication of R.H. Painter ( 1951), genetic resistance in the  
host plant has been extensively explored and plant resistance (R) genes have been  
transferred to elite cultivars of field crops and other economically important plant  
species.  Classical  breeding  methods  and  phenotypic  selections  were  followed  to  
achieve this until molecular markers were discovered. Currently, desired R-genes  
can be transferred and pyramided through marker-assisted selection and breeding.  
The status of donor sources, genetics of resistance, tagging and mapping of R-genes,  
and reported gene-linked markers are provided in what follows for the major insect  
pests of rice. 

2.1      Gall Midge 

Asian rice gall midge (ARGM) is a serious pest of rice in South and Southeast Asia.  
In India, gall midge damage is estimated to cause an annual yield loss of about  
USD 80 million (Bentur et al. 2003). The insect displays a unique life cycle, which  
is completed in 3–4 weeks. Maggots hatched from eggs laid on the plant surface  
crawl down between leaf sheaths to reach the apical meristem to feed. The insect  
feeds by laceration of the apical meristem and secretion of saliva, resulting in hyper- 
trophy and hyperplasia of cells, ultimately leading to the development of a nutritive  
tissue and a gall chamber in the tiller. The insect also renders the tiller sterile and  
arrests further differentiation. Maggots cease feeding in the third instar and pupate  
in the gall. The adult fly emerges from this modified sheath gall called “silver shoot,”  
which  is  a  typical  symptom  of  gall  midge  damage. ARGM  is  predominantly  a  
vegetative- stage pest and, in the event of a high percentage of tillers being converted  
into galls, there will be a proportionate decrease in the number of productive tillers,  
panicles, and therefore grain yield. 

----------------------- Page 392-----------------------

382                                                                               J. S. Bentur et al. 

    Rice varieties differ in their response to gall midge infestation. A small propor- 
tion of varieties is immune to pest attack by effectively killing the maggot within  
hours of feeding. The resistance mechanism displayed by the varieties is catego- 
rized into two distinct types. A majority of the resistant rice genotypes express a  
hypersensitive reaction (HR), leading to tissue necrosis at the site of maggot feed- 
ing, and are referred to as HR +ve (HR+) types, whereas a few of the resistant geno- 
types do not display HR but still maggot mortality is noticed, and these are termed  
HR  −ve (HR−) types. The role of phenols in HR+ resistance has been reported  
(Amudhan et al.  1999). Because the nature of resistance is antibiosis in both HR+  
and HR− types, host-plant resistance is the most effective way of managing the pest  
(Bentur et al. 2003). 
    Field  and  greenhouse  evaluations  of  more  than  50,000  germplasm  accessions  
resulted in the identification of more than 300 primary sources of resistance (Bentur  
et  al.  2011).  Studies  on  the  genetics  of  gall  midge  resistance  in  rice  have  often  
shown the involvement of a single dominant or recessive gene. To date, 12 genes  
conferring resistance against the pest have been reported (Himabindu et al. 2010;  
Leelagud  et  al.  2020),  10  of  which  are  dominant  (Gm1  through  Gm11,  except  
gm3 and gm12). The presence of gall midge biotypes within India was suspected  
during the early phase of breeding for resistance. So far, seven distinct biotypes  
have been characterized based on their reaction pattern against five groups of dif- 
ferential rice varieties (Vijayalakshmi et al. 2006). Similar to the interaction between  
pathogens  and  their  plant  hosts,  a  gene-for-gene  interaction  has  been  reported  
between rice resistance genes (i.e., R genes) and gall midge biotypes (Nair et al.  
2011). Each of the biotypes displays a specific range of virulence against R-genes,  
and likewise each R-gene confers resistance to specific biotypes, which also implies  
that none of the R-genes conferred resistance to all biotypes and none of the bio- 
types showed virulence against all of the R-genes. Hence, it is possible to extend the  
range of resistance against biotypes by combining diverse resistance genes through  
gene pyramiding. 
    Of the 12 gall midge resistance genes identified thus far, 10 (Gm1, Gm2, gm3,  
Gm4, Gm5, Gm6, Gm7, Gm8, Gm11, and gm12) have been tagged and mapped with  
reported linked markers (Table  1). As it is well known that single gene-conferred  
resistance against gall midge can break down within a short time, the strategy of  
pyramiding two or more genes with divergent mechanisms of resistance (i.e., HR+  
and  HR−)  has  been  advocated  for  durable  resistance  against  the  insect  pest  
(Sundaram et al. 2013). So far, three gall midge resistance genes, gm3 (Sama et al.  
2014), Gm4 (Divya et al.  2015), and Gm8 (Divya et al.  2018b), have been cloned  
and characterized, and another gene,  Gm2, has been reported to be allelic to gm3  
(Sama  et  al.  2014;  Sundaram  2007).  The  recessive  resistance  gene,  gm3,  which  
displays HR+, encodes an NB-ARC (NBS-LRR) domain-containing protein, while  
the dominant gene,  Gm4, which also displays HR+, encodes a leucine-rich repeat  
(LRR) protein, and Gm8, displaying HR−, encodes a proline-rich protein (PRP). It  
is desirable to deploy two or more previously undeployed genes that differ in their  
mechanism of resistance, for example,  Gm4 (HR+) and  Gm8 (HR−) genes would  
meet the above-specified requirements. Another gene, gm3, may also be considered  

----------------------- Page 393-----------------------

Table 1   List of rice resistance genes against major insects tagged and mapped along with information on linked markers 

                                                Primer  
              Chromosome                        physical  
 Gene         no.            Primer name        position (bp)  F primer                                            R primer                                      Reference 
 Brown planthopper 
 Bph 1        12L            BpE18-3 STS        ?              CGCTGCGAGAGTGTGACACT                                TTGGGTTACACGGGTTTGAC                          Kim and Sohn  
                                                                                                                                                                 (2005) 
 Bph 1        12L            pBPH9F             22,858,861     AGCGCTGGTCGTTGGGGTTGTAGT                            ATTAAAAGTGATCGCAGCCGTTCG                      Cha et al.  
                                                                                                                                                                 (2008) 
 bph2         12L            KAM4STS            ?              TAACTGGTGTTAGTGCGAATGC                              AATTCACGGCATGTGAAGCCCTAG                      Murai et al.  
                                                                                                                                                                 (2001) 
 bph2         12L            RM7102             13,213,987     GGGCGTTCGGTTTACTTGGTTACTCG                          GGCGGCATAGGAGTGTTTAGAGTGC                     Sun et al.  
                                                                                                                                                                 (2006) 
 bph2         12L            RM463              22,125,420     GAGGATTAATTAGCGTGTGACC                              GTCGTGACATCTACTCAAATGG                        Sun et al.  
                                                                                                                                                                 (2006) 
 BPh3         6S             RM190              1,765,637      CTTTGTCTATCTCAAGACAC                                TTGCAGATGTTCTTCCTGATG                         Jairin et al.  
                                                                                                                                                                 (2007a) 
 BPh3         6S             RM589              1,381,875      GTGGCTTAACCACATGAGAAACTACC                          TCACATCATTAGGTGGCAATCG                        Jairin et al.  
                                                                                                                                                                 (2007a) 
 BPh3         6S             RM588              1,612,412      TCTTGCTGTGCTGTTAGTGTACG                             GCAGGACATAAATACTAGGCATGG                      Jairin et al.  
                                                                                                                                                                 (2007a) 
 BPh3         6S             RM19291            1,216,883      CACTTGCACGTGTCCTCTGTACG                             GTGTTTCAGTTCACCTTGCATCG                       Jairin et al.  
                                                                                                                                                                 (2007b) 
 BPh3         6S             RM8072             1,409,335      GATCACTCAGGTCATCCATTC                               AATCAGAGAGGCTAAAGACAATAAT                     Jairin et al.  
                                                                                                                                                                 (2007b) 
 bph4         6S             RM586              1,477,792      TGCCATCTCATAAACCCACTAACC                            CTGAGATACGCCAACGAGATACC                       Jairin et al.  
                                                                                                                                                                 (2010) 
 bph4         6S             RM589              1,381,875      GTGGCTTAACCACATGAGAAACTACC                          TCACATCATTAGGTGGCAATCG                        Jairin et al.  
                                                                                                                                                                 (2010) 

                                                                                                                                                                    (continued) 

----------------------- Page 394-----------------------

Table 1   (continued) 

                                                 Primer  
              Chromosome                         physical  
 Gene         no.            Primer name         position (bp) F primer                                            R primer                                       Reference 
 bph4         6S             RM217               ?             ATCGCAGCAATGCCTCGT                                  GGGTGTGAACAAAGACAC                             Kawaguchi  
                                                                                                                                                                  et al. (2001) 
 bph4         6S             RM225               3,417,595     TGCCCATATGGTCTGGATG                                 GAAAGTGGATCAGGAAGGC                            Kawaguchi  
                                                                                                                                                                  et al. (2001) 
 Bph6         4L             RM6997              21,272,870    CGGCAGTAAATTTGCATTGACC                              AGTGGCCTTGTCAGTCTACATGC                        Qiu et al.  
                                                                                                                                                                  (2010) 
 Bph6         4L             RM5742              21,559,553    GATCCTCAAACGGCCTCTGC                                CCTTCAAAGTTTACTCACGCTCTGC                      Qiu et al.  
                                                                                                                                                                  (2010) 
 Bph9         12L            RM463               22,125,420    GAGGATTAATTAGCGTGTGACC                              GTCGTGACATCTACTCAAATGG                         Su et al.  
                                                                                                                                                                  (2006) 
 Bph9         12L            RM5341              19,114,746    CATCCGGAGGAAGTTTGAAAGAAGG                           CAAGGGCAACCTCTTCCACTACGC                       Su et al.  
                                                                                                                                                                  (2006) 
 Bph10a       12L            RG457FL/RB                        ?                                                    ?                                             Lang and Buu  

                             STS marker                                                                                                                           (2003) 
 Bph10a       12L            RG457FL/RL                        ?                                                    ?                                             Lang and Buu  

                             STS marker                                                                                                                           (2003) 
 Bph12a       4L             RM16459             5,213,984     TCCAGGAGTTTGCCTTGTAGTGC                             TAGCGAAGTCAGGATGGCATAGG                        Qiu et al.  

                                                                                                                                                                  (2012) 
 Bph12a       4L             RM1305              5,659,601     GGTACTACAAAGAAACCTGCATCG                            TCCTAGCTCAAATGTGCTATCTGG                       Qiu et al.  

                                                                                                                                                                  (2012) 
 Bph13a       2L             RM240               31,497,147    CCTTAATGGGTAGTGTGCAC                                TGTAACCATTCCTTCCATCC                           Liu et al.  

                                                                                                                                                                  (2001) 
 Bph13a       2L             RM250               32,774,365    GGTTCAAACCAAGCTGATCA                                GATGAAGGCCTTCCACGCAG                           Liu et al.  

                                                                                                                                                                  (2001) 
 BPh13a       2L             AJ09b StS from                    ?                                                    ?                                             Renganayaki  

                             RAPD                                                                                                                                 et al. (2002) 
 Bph14a       3L             SM1                 38,751,114    AGCGTTAAGCGCCATTATCA                                CGCCGAGGCATTAGAGTAGA                           Du et al.  

                                                                                                                                                                  (2009) 

----------------------- Page 395-----------------------

Table 1   (continued) 

                                                  Primer  
              Chromosome                          physical  
 Gene         no.             Primer name         position (bp)  F primer                                             R primer                                        Reference 
 Bph14b       3L              NBS-LRR                            AAATTCGTGGTTGTTCTGGT                                 TCGGTAACGATCCATGATGA                            Du et al.  

                                                                                                                                                                       (2009) 
 Bph15a       4S              MS1 reported        9,278,808      CATGGACCCACTTGTCATCC                                 AGCATGAGAGACTGCCAAGG                            Yang et al.  

                              earlier by C820                                                                                                                          (2004) 
                              and S11182  
                              RFLP marker 
 Bph15a       4S              RM261 reported      6,578,953      CTACTTCTCCCCTTGTGTCG                                 TGTACCATCGCCAAATCTCC                            Yang et al.  

                              earlier by C820                                                                                                                          (2004) 
                              and S11182  
                              RFLP marker 
 Bph16a       12L             RM6732              21,983,109     AATTTTGAACACCTCAAAGG                                 TTTTCAGTGCATGTCTTCG                             Hirabayashi  

                                                                                                                                                                      et al. (2004) 
 Bph17        4S              RM8213              4,446,064      TGTTGGGTGGGTAAAGTAGATGC                              CCCAGTGATACAAAGATGAGTTGG                         Sun et al.  
                                                                                                                                                                       (2005) 
 Bph17        4S              RM5953              9,379,510      AAACTTTCTGTGATGGTATC                                 ATCCTTGTCTAGAATTGACA                             Sun et al.  
                                                                                                                                                                       (2005) 
 Bph17b       4S              LRK2                6,953,940      CTTTCGCAGGGTGGCAAATAGGGT                             CCTTCGCTGCTCACTAGGACCGTGTA                      Liu et al.  

                                                                                                                                                                       (2015) 
 Bph18a       12L             RM463               22,125,420     GAGGATTAATTAGCGTGTGACC                               GTCGTGACATCTACTCAAATGG                          Jena et al.  

                                                                                                                                                                       (2006) 
 Bph18a       12L             S15552 STS                         ?                                                     ?                                              Jena et al.  

                              marker cleaved                                                                                                                           (2006) 
                              by alu1 enzyme 
 Bph18a       12L             RM511               17,401,530     AACGAAAGCGAAGCTGTCTCC                                ATTTGTTCCCTTCCTTCGATCC                           Suh et al.  

                                                                                                                                                                       (2011) 

                                                                                                                                                                         (continued) 

----------------------- Page 396-----------------------

Table 1   (continued) 

                                                Primer  
             Chromosome                         physical  
 Gene        no.            Primer name         position (bp) F primer                                            R primer                                      Reference 
 Bph18a       12L           RM1584              27,104,354    TAGCCTGCAGCCACCCTGATCC                              CAATGTGACTTCCGTGCGTAGTGG                      Suh et al.  

                                                                                                                                                                (2011) 
 bph19        3S            RM6308              7,181,156     TCTCGACCTGGCTCTCCTCTAGC                             AGTGCACGGACATGTCACTCTCG                       Chen et al.  
                                                                                                                                                                (2006) 
 bph19       3S             RM3134              7,240,409     GCAGGCACAAAAGCAAAGAG                                AGGTGAAGGTGCATTGTGTG                          Chen et al.  
                                                                                                                                                                (2006) 
 Bph20a      4S             MS10 STS            8,071,921     CAATACGAGAAGCCCCTCAC                                CTGAAGGAACACGCGGTAGT                          Rahman et al.  

                            marker                                                                                                                              (2009) 
 Bph20a      4S             RM5953              9,379,510     AAACTTTCTGTGATGGTATC                                ATCCTTGTCTAGAATTGACA                          Rahman et al.  

                                                                                                                                                                (2009) 
 bph20a      4S             RM435 BYL7          535,684       AAGCTAGGGAATCAGCGGTTA BYL                           TGTGGCATGTCACTCACTCAC                         Yang et al.  

                            closest marker                                                                                                                      (2012) 
 bph20a      4S             RM540 BYL8          468,236       CCCACTTCCACAACCACA BYL8                             ATGCTCCTAGCTTCCTATTCC                         Yang et al.  

                            closest marker                                                                                                                      (2012) 
 Bph21a       12L           RM3726              23,275,187    TACACCCACCCACATACGTCAGC                             GTCGTACTCCCGGATCTTCTTCC                       Rahman et al.  

                                                                                                                                                                (2009) 
 Bph21a       12L           RM5479              24,412,536    CTCACCATAGCAATCTCCTGTGC                             ACTTCGTTCACTTGCATCATGG                        Rahman et al.  

                                                                                                                                                                (2009) 
 bph21        10S           RM222               2,620,380     CTTAAATGGGCCACATGCG                                 CAAAGCTTCCGGCCAAAAG                           Yang et al.  
                                                                                                                                                                (2012) 
 bph21        10S           RM244                             CCGACTGTTCGTCCTTATCA                                CTGCTCTCGGGTGAACGT                            Yang et al.  
                                                                                                                                                                (2012) 
 bph22       4              RM8212              99,416        CCACCGCACTTGTCTATG                                  TCCAATCTCACTCTCGACTC                          Hou et al.  
                                                                                                                                                                (2011) 

----------------------- Page 397-----------------------

Table 1   (continued) 

                                                Primer  
              Chromosome                        physical  
 Gene         no.            Primer name        position (bp)  F primer                                            R primer                                      Reference 
 bph22        4              RM261              6,574,396      CTACTTCTCCCCTTGTGTCG                                TGTACCATCGCCAAATCTCC                          Hou et al.  
                                                                                                                                                                 (2011) 
 Bph22a       6              RM19429Rm584       3,417,532      TATGTGGTTGGCTTGCCTAGTGG                             TGCCCATATGGTCTGGATGTGC                        Harini et al.  

                                                                                                                                                                 (2010) 
 Bph22a       6              RM584              3,417,532      TATGTGGTTGGCTTGCCTAGTGG                             TGCCCATATGGTCTGGATGTGC                        Harini et al.  

                                                                                                                                                                 (2010) 
 Bph22a       6              RM585              3,169,373      CTAGCTAGCCATGCTCTCGTACC                             CTGTGACTGACTTGGTCATAGGG                       Harini et al.  

                                                                                                                                                                 (2010) 
 bph23a       8              RM2655             2,017,692      TGTCTGTGTTGTCACTGCCTTATCG                           TCCGCTCTGTGTGTATCTGATCTGG                     Hou et al.  

                                                                                                                                                                 (2011) 
 bph23a       8              RM3572             3,928,306      CCATTTGGTAGGTCCATCTTACCC                            CTCCCAAGTGAAGTGCTGTCTGG                       Hou et al.  

                                                                                                                                                                 (2011) 
 Bph25        6S             S00310             214,278        CAACAAGATGGACGGCAAGG                                TTGGAAGAAAAGGCAGGCAC                          Myint et al.  
                                                                                                                                                                 (2012) 
 Bph25        6S             RM8101             1,705,742      CACTGACATAGCTAAGGTCTCATGTCTTAT                      TGGTTAACTCGCTATTATAATGAGTTCG                  Myint et al.  
                                                                                                                                                                 (2012) 
 Bph26        12L            RM5479             24,409,241     CTAAGCTCACCATAGCAATC                                ATACACTTCTCCCCTCTCTG                          Myint et al.  
                                                                                                                                                                 (2012) 
 Bph26        12L            MSSR2              25,033,993     CATGTCGAAGAGGTTGCAGA                                GGTTTCATCCAAGTCCACGA                          Myint et al.  
                                                                                                                                                                 (2012) 
 Bph26b       12L            LRR                22,884,874     TAGCATCAGTCCCTTGCTTGTTTGC                           ATTGATTTAATTAGCAGACAAGTTG                     Tamura et al.  

                                                                                                                                                                 (2014) 
 Bph27a       4              RM16853            19,201,791     CTCCCATCCTTCATTTCATCTCG                             CTTTCTGCAAGACACTGCAAACG                       Huang et al.  

                                                                                                                                                                 (2013) 
 Bph27a       4              RM16846            19,115,583     CTACAAGCAACACAGTATCACAGC                            GGTAACTGGTGCTTATTTAGCC                        Huang et al.  

                                                                                                                                                                 (2013) 

                                                                                                                                                                     (continued) 

----------------------- Page 398-----------------------

Table 1   (continued) 

                                                 Primer  
              Chromosome                         physical  
 Gene         no.            Primer name         position (bp) F primer                                             R primer                                       Reference 
 Bph28        11             RM26656             15,738,361    GCAAAGAACATTGTGGCAAACACC                             TGGACACATTGTATCGTGCTTCG                        Wu et al.  
                                                                                                                                                                   (2014) 
 BPh28        11             RM26725             17,114,046    ATGTAGGCCCAAACGAGCTCTGACC                            ATGCCATAGTAGCGCTTGCGTATCC                      Wu et al.  
                                                                                                                                                                   (2014) 
 bph29a       6              RM435 BYL7          535,684       AAGCTAGGGAATCAGCGGTTA BYL                            TGTGGCATGTCACTCACTCAC                          Wang et al.  

                             closest marker                                                                                                                        (2008) 
 bph29a       6              RM540 BYL8          468,236       CCCACTTCCACAACCACA BYL8                              ATGCTCCTAGCTTCCTATTCC                          Wang et al.  

                             closest marker                                                                                                                        (2008) 
 bph29b       6              G5 B3 domain        484,709       ATGGCCACCATTGTTGCATG                                 TCAAAGCTGCAAATCCAGCG                           Wang et al.  

                                                                                                                                                                   (2015) 
 bph30a       10             RM222               2,620,380     CTTAAATGGGCCACATGCG                                  CAAAGCTTCCGGCCAAAAG                            Wang et al.  

                                                                                                                                                                   (2008) 
 bph30a       10             RM244                             CCGACTGTTCGTCCTTATCA                                 CTGCTCTCGGGTGAACGT                             Wang et al.  

                                                                                                                                                                   (2008) 
 BPH31        3              PA26                              ?                                                    ?                                              Prahalada  
                                                                                                                                                                   et al. (2017) 
 BPH31        3              RM2334              26,740,452    CATGCATCTGATCTGATTAT                                 TGTGAAGAGTACAAGTAGGG                           Prahalada  
                                                                                                                                                                   et al. (2017) 
 Bph32        6              RM19291             1,215,884     CACTTGCACGTGTCCTCTGTACG                              GTGTTTCAGTTCACCTTGCATCG                        Ren et al.  
                                                                                                                                                                   (2016) 
 Bph32        6              RM8072              1,408,336     GATCACTCAGGTCATCCATTC                                AATCAGAGAGGCTAAAGACAATAAT                      Ren et al.  
                                                                                                                                                                   (2016) 
 Bph32b       6              SCP                 1,099,689     TGAGGGAGTTGTAGTAGGAGTA                               CGTCGTTGATGAAGTAAAGGT                          Ren et al.  

                                                                                                                                                                   (2016) 
 Bph33        1              RM11522             28,071,767    TAACTGCAGTGCTCAACAAAGG                               CTAGGTACCGGATTAAGATTCACC                       Naik et al.  
                                                                                                                                                                   (2018) 

----------------------- Page 399-----------------------

                                              Primer  
             Chromosome                       physical  
Gene        no.            Primer name        position (bp) F primer                                          R primer                                     Reference 
Bph33        1             RM488              24,808,556    AACAACCAGCGTATGCGTTCTCG                           CCCACGGCTTTGTAGGAAGAAGC                      Naik et al.  
                                                                                                                                                           (2018) 
Bph34a       4             RM16994            21,331,444    TGGCAGTACACACTACAGTACATGC                         AGAGGGAGGAGAGAAAGGAAGG                       Kumar et al.  

                                                                                                                                                           (2018) 
Bph34a       4             RM17007            21,484,908    CTTCCCACGCGAAACTTCATGG                            TCCGGCCAAGACAATATCAACG                       Kumar et al.  

                                                                                                                                                           (2018) 
White-backed planthopper 
Wbph7        3L            R1925                            ?                                                 ?                                            Tan et al.  
                                                                                                                                                           (2004) 
Wbph7        3L            G1318                            ?                                                 ?                                            Tan et al.  
                                                                                                                                                           (2004) 
Wbph8       4S             R288                             ?                                                 ?                                            Tan et al.  
                                                                                                                                                           (2004) 
Wbph8       4S             S11182                           ?                                                 ?                                            Tan et al.  
                                                                                                                                                           (2004) 
Wbph9t       6             RM589              1,380,866     ATCATGGTCGGTGGCTTAAC                              CAGGTTCCAACCAGACACTG                         Ramesh et al.  
                                                                                                                                                           (2014) 
Wbph9t       6             RM539                            GAGCGTCCTTGTTAAAACCG                              AGTAGGGTATCACGCATCCG                         Ramesh et al.  
                                                                                                                                                           (2014) 
Wbph10t      12            SSR12-17.2                                                                                                                      Ramesh et al.  
                                                                                                                                                           (2014) 
Wbph10t      12            RM28487            23,142,514    GAGGTGATCTTAATGCCATCTTGACG                        TACATGCAACCTGGGTATGAGAGTGC                   Ramesh et al.  
                                                                                                                                                           (2014) 
Wbph11t      4             RM3643             19,948,112    AGCATGAGCAGGTGCTAGTG                              CGTTGCATGTGTGATGGC                           Ramesh et al.  
                                                                                                                                                           (2014) 
Wbph11t      4             RM1223             25,292,767    CAGCGTCTCCAAGAAACTCC                              GCTACCAGGTCAGAGTTGCC                         Ramesh et al.  
                                                                                                                                                           (2014) 

                                                                                                                                                         (continued) 

----------------------- Page 400-----------------------

                                                   Primer  
              Chromosome                           physical  
Gene          no.             Primer name          position (bp)   F primer                                                R primer                                          Reference 
Wbph 12t      4               RM16913              19,646,468      GTGTACGTGTTGGCTCTCTGTACG                                GATGTTGCTTGTGCTGCAACC                             Ramesh et al.  
                                                                                                                                                                             (2014) 
Wbph 12t      4               RM471                19,426,246      CGGATCCAAGAAACAGCAG                                     TTCGGTATCCTCCACACCTC                              Ramesh et al.  
                                                                                                                                                                             (2014) 
Ovc           6S              S1520                                ?                                                       ?                                                 Yamasaki  
                                                                                                                                                                             et al. (2003) 
Ovc           6S              L688                                 ?                                                       ?                                                 Yamasaki  
                                                                                                                                                                             et al. (2003) 
Green rice leafhopper 
Grh1          5               C309                                 ?                                                       ?                                                 Tamura et al.  
                                                                                                                                                                             (1999) 
Grh1          5               R569                                 ?                                                       ?                                                 Kadowaki  
                                                                                                                                                                             et al. (2003) 
Grh2          11L             G144                                 ?                                                       ?                                                 Fukuta et al.  
                                                                                                                                                                             (1998) 
Grh2          11L             G4001                                ?                                                       ?                                                 Kadowaki  
                                                                                                                                                                             et al. (2003) 
Grh2          11L             G1465                                ?                                                       ?                                                 Kadowaki  
                                                                                                                                                                             et al. (2003) 
Grh3          6               C288B                                ?                                                       ?                                                 Saka et al.  
                                                                                                                                                                             (2006) 
Grh3          6               C133A                                ?                                                       ?                                                 Saka et al.  
                                                                                                                                                                             (2006) 
Grh4          3L              G1465                                ?                                                       ?                                                 Fukuta et al.  
                                                                                                                                                                             (1998) 
Grh4          3L              C1186                                ?                                                       ?                                                 Kadowaki  
                                                                                                                                                                             et al. (2003) 

----------------------- Page 401-----------------------

                                                Primer  
             Chromosome                         physical  
Gene         no.            Primer name         position (bp)  F primer                                             R primer                                       Reference 
Grh4         3L             R2982                              ?                                                    ?                                              Kadowaki  
                                                                                                                                                                   et al. (2003) 
Grh5         8L             RM502               26,492,117     GCGATCGATGGCTACGAC                                   ACAACCCAACAAGAAGGACG                           Fujita et al.  
                                                                                                                                                                   (2006) 
Grh5         8L             RM6845              27,560,145     GTGACGGCAAGAGGAAGAAG                                 GTTCGACAGGAACGCCAC                             Fujita et al.  
                                                                                                                                                                   (2006) 
Grh6         4S             Y3635R                             ?                                                    ??                                             Tamura et al.  
                                                                                                                                                                   (2004) 
Grh6         4S             C708                               ?                                                                                                   Tamura et al.  
                                                                                                                                                                   (2004) 
Grh6         4S             RM8213              4,441,638      AGCCCAGTGATACAAAGATG                                 GCGAGGAGATACCAAGAAAG                           Fujita et al.  
                                                                                                                                                                   (2004) 
Grh6         4S             G6-9                                                                                                                                   Fujita et al.  
                                                                                                                                                                   (2004) 
QGRH9        9L             RM201               20,174,289     CTCGTTTATTACCTACAGTACC                               CTACCTCCTTTCTAGACCGATA                         Fujita et al.  
                                                                                                                                                                   (2010) 
QGRH9        9L             RM205               22,720,624     CTGGTTCTGTATGGGAGCAG                                 CTGGCCCTTCACGTTTCAGTG                          Fujita et al.  
                                                                                                                                                                   (2010) 
Gall midge 
Gm1          9              RM23941             7,818,607      AGAATCGAACCCTAACACATGC                               TATCGCTTGATTCTTGGACAGC                         Sundaram  
                                                                                                                                                                   (2007) 
Gm1          9              RM23956             7,992,661      GTCTCTCCCTCTCTCATCTTGTCG                             CCCTATTCATGTGCAATGGAACC                        Sundaram  
                                                                                                                                                                   (2007) 
Gm2          4              RM17473             30,838,175     TCTCTCCAGCTCCCTAAACATTCC                             AGCGACACACTGTTCACCTTGC                         Sundaram  
                                                                                                                                                                   (2007) 
Gm2          4              RM17503             31,717,625     CCAGATCATCCAGGCATAACATCACC                           CGGCGCTGGTAAACTCCATTCC                         Sundaram  
                                                                                                                                                                   (2007) 

                                                                                                                                                                   (continued) 

----------------------- Page 402-----------------------

                                                 Primer  
             Chromosome                          physical  
Gene         no.             Primer name         position (bp)  F primer                                             R primer                                        Reference 
gm3           4              RM17480             31,146,877     GAGTTCGTCCCTGACAAACAGAAACG                           GTGAGCGAGCGAGTGAGTGAGC                          Sama et al.  
                                                                                                                                                                     (2014) 
gm3           4              gm3SSR4             32,075,106     AGACACGAGGGAATTATGC                                  CTCTATATTTGCCGCATCC                             Sama et al.  
                                                                                                                                                                     (2014) 
gm3b          4              NB-ARC              31,950,000     CTGCCAGAGATGGGCCTTCCA                                CGTACAAATTCCTGTACCACTC                          Sama et al.  

                                                                                                                                                                     (2014) 
Gm4           8              RM22551             5,451,661      CTTCGATCTCCTCGTCCTCTTCC                              GAGCATGAGATGATGCATGACG                          Divya et al.  
                                                                                                                                                                     (2015) 
Gm4           8              RM22562             5,782,732      GATCGGAGGAGGGAGGAAGACG                               GTCGCATCCACTCATATTCCAAGC                        Divya et al.  
                                                                                                                                                                     (2015) 
Gm4b          8              LRR-del             5,583,333      GTGGATCGAGAGAAGACAAG                                 CTTGAGGACGATATTCAAGC                            Divya et al.  

                                                                                                                                                                     (2015) 
Gm5           12             OPB14                              ?                                                    ?                                                see Bentur  
                                                                                                                                                                     et al. (2003) 
Gm6           4              OPM061400                          ?                                                    ?                                               Katiyar et al.  
                                                                                                                                                                     (2001) 
Gm6           4              RG214                              ?                                                    ?                                               Katiyar et al.  
                                                                                                                                                                     (2001) 
Gm6           4              RG476                              ?                                                    ?                                               Katiyar et al.  
                                                                                                                                                                     (2001) 
Gm7           4              SA598                              ?                                                    ?                                               Sardesai et al.  
                                                                                                                                                                     (2002) 
Gm7           4              F8                                 ?                                                    ?                                               Sardesai et al.  
                                                                                                                                                                     (2002) 
Gm8           8              RM22685             8,800,203      ATGGGCTTCCAGGCTCAATCTCG                              CCCACTCTCACGTCTCCTCTCTTCC                       Sama et al.  
                                                                                                                                                                     (2012) 
Gm8           8              RM22709             9,226,565      CGCGTGGGCGAGACTAATCG                                 CCTTGACTCCGAGGATTCATTGTCC                       Sama et al.  
                                                                                                                                                                     (2012) 

----------------------- Page 403-----------------------

                                                   Primer  
              Chromosome                           physical  
 Gene         no.             Primer name          position (bp)  F primer                                              R primer                                         Reference 
 Gm8b          8              PRP-Del              9,127,586      TATAAAGAGGACGGTCTAACCTTTA                              GCACAGGGAAGTTGTCAGTTCAAGTA                      Divya et al.  

                                                                                                                                                                         (2018a) 
 Gm11          12             RM28574              24,292,314     TAGTTTGGTGAAGTGGCATTGG                                ATAGTAGGGCAAGGATTCAGAAGAGG                       Himabindu  
                                                                                                                                                                         et al. (2010) 
 Gm11          12             RM28706              25,992,979     GGTTCCCGGTCATCATATTTCC                                ACTTTACCCACGCGCTTTGC                             Himabindu  
                                                                                                                                                                         et al. (2010) 
 gm12         2               RM3340               386,212        GAGAGAGACACCAAATGATCCATCC                             ACTGATTTGGCCCTTGTTCTTGG                          Leelagud  
                                                                                                                                                                         et al. 2020 
 gm12         2               S2-76222             76,222         CACACATACCCACCCACTAGTGAAGATGAA[                                                                        Leelagud  
                                                                  C/T]                                                                                                   et al. 2020 
                                                                  TGAATGCCAATGGGAGAAGAGGAGAGCAGA 

? = sequence information not available in the publication cited 
F primer and R primer = forward and reverse primers, respectively 
aGene has been introgressed from wild species 
bCloned gene 

----------------------- Page 404-----------------------

394                                                                                          J. S. Bentur et al. 

for pyramiding since it is a HR+ type and recessively inherited and has not been  
deployed so far in any variety. 
    Using Gm4 and Gm8, the research group at ICAR-IIRR (Abhilash Kumar et al.  
2017) has developed gene-pyramided lines in the genetic background of the elite  
restorer line RPHR1005R (restorer line for the popular rice hybrid DRRH3) through  
marker-assisted  breeding.  In  another  such  effort,  the  high-yielding  rice  variety  
Akshayadhan has been improved for its resistance against gall midge by targeted  
transfer of Gm4 and  Gm8 genes. Sama et al. (2014) introduced the recessive gene  
gm3 into the genetic background of elite rice variety Improved Samba Mahsuri with  
the help of markers. In a recent report (Venkanna et al. 2018), two major resistance  
genes, gm3 and  Gm8, have been pyramided in the genetic background of the fine-  
grain- type  rice  variety  Kavya,  which  already  possesses  Gm1.  Now  that  closely  
linked markers/functional markers are available for all the major gall midge resis- 
tance genes, selected gene combinations can be pyramided into elite genetic back- 
grounds (Divya et al. 2018c) easily through marker-assisted breeding for developing  
durable multiARGM biotype-resistant rice cultivars/hybrids. 

2.2      Planthoppers and Leafhoppers  

Although  more  than  100  species  of  planthoppers  (Delphacidae)  and  leafhoppers  
(Cicadellidae)  are  reported  to  feed  on  rice,  three  species  of  planthoppers  (BPH,  
WBPH, and SBPH) have gained high economic importance since 2000 (Bentur and  
Viratkamath 2008). Likewise, of the leafhoppers, GLH, GRL, and ZLH are impor- 
tant. Although both groups consist of phloem sap feeders, planthoppers cause severe  
damage by feeding alone, leading to total death of plants, termed hopper burn. Both  
leafhoppers  and  planthoppers  vector  disease-causing  viruses  and  cause  indirect  
damage to the crop. The main virus diseases thus transmitted are rice ragged stunt,  
rice grassy stunt, and wilted stunt by BPH; southern rice black-streaked dwarf by  
WBPH; stripe and black-streaked dwarf by SBPH; and rice tungro by several spe- 
cies  of  leafhoppers.  In  response  to  planthoppers  and  leafhoppers  gaining  impor- 
tance, screening of rice germplasm for resistance began at the International Rice  
Research Institute (IRRI), Philippines, during the 1970s. Such initiatives were also  
taken up in other Asian rice-growing countries, leading to reports of a large number  
of resistance sources (IRRI  1979; Heinrichs et al.  1985; Heong and Hardy 2010).  
Several of these sources were selected for systematic studies on genetics of resis- 
tance, resulting in the identification of more than 38 major resistance genes against  
BPH, 14 against WBPH, 14 against GLH, six against GRL, and three against ZLH  
(Fujita et al. 2013; Ling and Weillin 2016; Du et al. 2020). Most of these genes are  
now  tagged  and  mapped  on  different  rice  chromosomes  and  reliable  molecular  
markers linked to these traits are available (Table  1). Marker-assisted selection as a  
tool for breeding for BPH resistance using a single gene or multiple genes is being  

----------------------- Page 405-----------------------

Molecular Approaches for Insect Pest Management in Rice                                   395 

reported (Liu et al.  2016; H Wang et al. 2016a; Y Wang et al. 2017b; Jiang et al.  
2018). However, a few issues remain to be resolved. Several of the reported BPH  
Rgenes are not effective on the Indian subcontinent (Horgan et al.  2016); hence,  
more  effective  genes  for  the  region  need  to  be  characterized  from  the  reported  
sources. All the BPH Rgenes, except probably Bph3 (Liu et al. 2015), are not effec- 
tive  against  WBPH.  Since  these  two  species  are  sympatric  and  are  often  under  
severe  interspecific  competition  (Srinivasan  et  al.  2016),  selecting  for  resistance  
against BPH alone may not be the right approach. But, efforts to tag, map, and clone  
WBPH resistance genes are few. Another limitation is the ability of BPH to quickly  
evolve virulent biotypes, especially if a single Rgene is deployed. Hence, gene pyra- 
miding is suggested for durability. Ideally, undeployed genes with different mecha- 
nisms of resistance are the choice for pyramiding. Of the 13 BPH Rgenes cloned,  
eight (Bph14, Bph26, Bph18, Bph9/1/7/10/21) represent the NBS-LRR family; pro- 
teins coded by these are located in the cytoplasm, while others are reported as lectin  
receptor kinases (Bph3, Bph15), B3 DNA-binding domain (bph29), or SCR domain  
protein (Bph32) coding (Ren et al. 2016; Y Zhao et al. 2016b; Du et al. 2020), which  
are membrane bound. It is suggested to combine two genes from these two classes  
(such as Bph14 + Bph15) to achieve durability (Jing et al. 2017). 

2.3      Other Pests 

Rice stem borers are ubiquitous insects representing Diopsidae (Diptera), Noctuidae,  
and Crambidae (Lepidoptera) families. Among several species of rice stem borers,  
YSB is considered the most economically important insect pest in almost all rice-  
growing countries of Asia (Makkar and Bentur 2017). Larvae of YSB feed only on  
rice  and  can  cause  damage  at  both  the  vegetative  (deadheart)  and  reproductive  
(whitehead) stages of the rice crop, with the latter being the main cause of yield loss  
(Savary et al. 2000). Because of the lack of highly resistant sources in rice germ- 
plasm explored so for, breeding for resistance or molecular mapping of resistance  
genes against YSB has not been encouraging (Bentur 2007). Nonetheless, rice vari- 
eties such as Vikas, Ratna, and Sasyasree have been developed and released in India  
with moderate YSB resistance. Most of these varieties have either TKM6 or W1263  
as the source of resistance. Because of the lack of the desired level of resistance  
against YSB in the primary gene pool of rice, the secondary gene pool consisting of  
wild species of  Oryza is being explored at IRRI, ICAR-IIRR, and other institutes.  
Chromosome segment substitution lines (CSSLs) need to be developed for different  
accessions of wild rice that can be evaluated for YSB resistance. Also, ethyl meth- 
anesulfonate (EMS) mutants of rice have been generated and evaluated at ICAR-  
IIRR and have shown encouraging results in preliminary evaluations. More extensive  
and concerted efforts in this direction have potential to identify novel sources of  
resistance that can be used by breeders and entomologists for understanding the  
resistance mechanisms and developing YSB-resistant rice cultivars. 

----------------------- Page 406-----------------------

396                                                                                          J. S. Bentur et al. 

3      Novel Approaches Through Genomics 

3.1      RNAi Approach for Insect Resistance  

Transgenic crops harboring Bt endotoxin genes or other insecticidal protein-coding  
genes have shown tremendous potential for managing insect pests. Several of these  
genes have been used in transforming rice as described in the next section, although  
none of these have been commercially cultivated. As an alternative to this approach,  
RNA interference (RNAi) can be exploited, which has been well demonstrated for  
resistance induction in plants against viruses, bacteria, and nematodes. RNAi is an  
RNA-driven          post-transcriptional         homology-based            gene-silencing        mechanism  
through the mRNA degradation pathway present in all eukaryotic organisms. The  
RNAi is triggered by double-stranded RNAs (dsRNA), which are processed by the  
RNase-III-like  Dicer  protein  to  produce  small  interfering  RNAs  (siRNAs).  The  
guide strand of siRNA directs an RNA-induced silencing complex (RISC) to the  
target mRNA (Fig.  1). The most important constituent of RISC is RNase protein  
Argonaute, which helps in the degradation of target mRNAs sharing homology with  
the guide strand of siRNA (Zamore et al. 2000). The double-stranded RNAs specific  
to key insect genes can be stably expressed in plant tissues fed on by the insect and  
that in turn can trigger the RNAi pathway to degrade the mRNAs transcribed by the  
key insect genes (Price and Gatehouse 2008; Agarwal et al. 2012). 
    Key  genes  in  insects  are  identified  as  targets  of  RNAi,  that  is,  genes  coding  
developmental proteins, digestive enzymes, salivary gland proteins, nervous system  
regulatory proteins, proteins involved in host-insect interaction, hormone receptors,  
gut enzymes, and proteins involved in metabolism (Gatehouse 2008; Huvenne and  
Smagghe 2010; Agarwal et al. 2012; Kola et al. 2015). 
    Initial successes in experiments (Tomoyasu and Denell 2004; Turner et al. 2006)  
raised hope among researchers that RNAi could be another alternative and effective  
tool to develop insect resistance in crop plants. Initially, dsRNAs were delivered to  
the target insects either by injection or through artificial diet. Baum et al. (2007)  
demonstrated the effectiveness of host-plant-mediated production of dsRNA in crop  
                                                                                                     + 
protection. Transgenic maize plants producing insect-specific vacuolar H  ATPase  
dsRNAs had decreased root damage by western corn rootworm. In another similar  
report, Mao et al. (2007) generated transgenic Nicotiana tabacum and Arabidopsis  
thaliana targeting RNAi against the cytochrome P450 gene of Helicoverpa armig- 
era, resulting in retarded larval growth of insects feeding on these modified hosts.  
The versatility of the application of RNAi against different insect orders and target  
genes shows the potential of RNAi for managing diverse crop pests (Terenius et al.  
2011; Khajuria et al. 2015; Zhang et al. 2017). Recent reports suggest that the pro- 
duction of dsRNAs in chloroplasts, rather than in cytoplasm, can improve insect  
resistance significantly as long as dsRNAs can be stably produced in chloroplasts,  
which are devoid of RNAi machinery (Zhang et al. 2015; Jin et al. 2015; Bally et al.  
2018). The first such RNAi-based DvSnf7 dsRNA-expressing maize crop targeting  
western corn rootworm is scheduled to be commercialized (Khajuria et al. 2018).  
Several  research  groups  have  been  working  on  modifying  the  technology  for  its  
more efficient application. 

----------------------- Page 407-----------------------

Molecular Approaches for Insect Pest Management in Rice                                           397 

Fig.  1   Schematic  representation  of  host-induced  gene  silencing  in  insects  through  siRNA  
approach. (1) Integration of insect gene-targeted siRNA cassette (transgene) into rice genome; (2)  
fate of transgene in rice cells; (3) expression of transgene in rice cell generates the mRNA; (4)  
formations of dsRNA through self-complementation of transgene’s sense and antisense strands in  
rice cell; (5) host Dicer-mediated specific cleavage of dsRNA leads to production of siRNAs in rice  
cell;  (6)  host-generated  siRNAs  processed  by  host Argonaute  protein  (the  main  component  of  
RNA-induced silencing complex or RISC); (7) host-generated siRNAs are nonfunctional in rice  
cells due to absence of targeted gene; (8 and  9) host-synthesized dsRNAs/siRNAs transfer from  
rice plant to insect through feeding on rice tissues; (10) fate of transferred dsRNA/siRNAs in insect  
cells; (11) generation of siRNAs from dsRNA through insect Dicer-mediated cleavage; (12) the  
siRNAs are processed by insect Argonaute proteins/RISC complex; (13a) formation of activated  
RISC along with target-specific guide RNA; (13b and  13c) the passenger RNA is separated from  
guide RNA and degraded; (14) transcription of insect DNA resulted in the expression of targeted  
functional mRNA (transcript); (15) guide strand of siRNA helps in identification and binding of  
activated  RISC  to  the  targeted  mRNA;  (16)  silencing  of  targeted  gene  expression  by  RISC-  
mediated cleavage of corresponding mRNA 

    Application of the RNAi tool for insect resistance in rice is in the developmental  
phase. Most of the reports on RNAi in rice are centered on BPH (Zha et al. 2011;  
Zhou et al. 2013; Yu et al. 2014; Wang et al. 2018) and YSB (Renuka et al. 2017).  
RNAi has been used for functional genomics of glutathione  S-transferase (GST)  
genes, which are involved in the degradation of toxins produced by host plants and  
insecticides. Injecting dsRNAs targeting the NlGSTe1 and NlGSTm2 genes into  
nymphs  of  BPH  enhanced  their  sensitivity  to  chlorpyrifos  but  not  to  beta-  
cypermethrin. Through feeding assays and stable expression of NlEcR (ecdysone  
receptor gene) targeting dsRNAs in rice, Yu et al. (2014) showed significant down-  
regulation  of  target  gene  expression  and  a  decrease  in  the  number  of  offspring  

----------------------- Page 408-----------------------

398                                                                               J. S. Bentur et al. 

produced by BPH adults. Likewise, Zha et al. (2011) targeted three midgut genes,  
carboxypeptidase (Nlcar), hexose transporter (NlHT1), and trypsin-like serine pro- 
tease (Nltry). L Zhao et al. (2016a) aimed at trehalase genes involved in chitin bio- 
synthesis and degradation. Wang et al. (2018) aimed at the calmodulin gene, Waris  
et  al.  (2018)  aimed  at  the  chemosensory  protein  8  (CSP8)  gene,  and  Zhu  et  al.  
(2017b) studied the function of the ribosomal protein gene (NlRPL5) using an RNAi  
tool. Pan et al. (2018) used RNAi to knock down 135 CP (chitin and cuticular pro- 
tein) genes by injecting specific dsRNAs and showed that 32 CPs are necessary for  
normal egg production and development. Li et al. (2015) suggested that dsRNAs are  
stable under diverse environments and can be absorbed by roots of crop plants. This  
study provides scope to use dsRNAs as biopesticides. The above-cited studies are  
laying the foundation for the development of RNAi as a tool for managing rice pests  
such as BPH. 
    Kola et al. (2016) showed by feeding YSB larvae with dsRNA of cytochrome  
P450  derivative  (CYP6)  and  amino  peptidase  N  (APN)  that  expression  of  target  
genes  decreased  and  resulted  in  increased  mortality  of  larvae  after  12–15  days.  
Similarly,  Zeng  et  al.  (2018)  knocked  down  three  chemosensory  protein  (CSP)  
genes in rice leaffolder (C. medinalis) through injection of dsRNAs, which down- 
regulated insect response to the specific chemicals. He et al. (2018), in contrast,  
overexpressed striped stem borer-derived miR-14 microRNA in rice, which resulted  
in a high resistance against the pest. 

3.2      Genome Editing Approach for Insect Resistance 

Genome editing tools enable us to edit the genome or specific genes of an organism  
by addition/deletion or replacement of nucleotides with high precision and with few  
off-target effects. Because of its simplicity and wider applicability, genome editing  
is being practiced in many laboratories for functional genomics and trait improve- 
ment. In agriculture, the technology has immense potential to improve yield and  
abiotic and biotic stress tolerance of crops. Also, the technology does not attract  
many concerns regarding biosafety regulators, specifically in the case of deletion of  
nucleotides. Most of the research on genome editing has been focused on functional  
genomics, trait discovery, and improvement in plants (Arora and Narula 2017; Yin  
et al. 2017; Aglawe et al. 2018). 
    The use of genome editing techniques for pest control in plants has just been  
hypothesized.  Zuo  et  al.  (2017)  created  a  mutation  in  Spodoptera  exigua  with  
CRISPR/Cas9 technology, which resulted in a mutant insect with high resistance  
against  chlorantraniliprole,  cyantraniliprole,  and  flubendiamide  insecticides.  To  
demonstrate the role of the cadherin gene in developing resistance against Bt toxin,  
the gene was edited by CRISPR/Cas9 in Helicoverpa armigera. The mutant strain  
of  the  insect  showed  high  resistance  to  Cry1Ac  (J  Wang  et  al.  2016b).  The  
pheromone- binding  protein  1  (PBP1)  gene  of  H.  armigera  was  mutated  and  the  
mutant  male  adults  showed  impaired  responses  to  sex  pheromone  (ZF Ye  et  al.  

----------------------- Page 409-----------------------

Molecular Approaches for Insect Pest Management in Rice                                  399 

2017b). Dong et al. (2017) mutated PBP1 and PBP3 genes in striped stem borer to  
demonstrate their function. Biogenesis of the lysosome-related organelles complex  
1 subunit 2 (BLOS2) gene of Spodoptera litura was edited, which resulted in the  
disappearance of the yellow strips and white spots on the larval integument (Zhu  
et  al.  2017a).  Similarly,  when  the  abdominal-A  (Slabd-A)  gene  of  S.  litura  was  
mutated, it resulted in ectopic pigmentation and anomalous segmentation during the  
larval stage (Bi et al. 2016). Recently, Xue et al. (2018) edited two eye pigmentation  
genes in BPH, resulting in bright red compound eyes. 
   Although most of these reports showed successful application of CRISPR-based  
genome  editing  technology  for  functional  genomics  of  insect  genes,  its  use  for  
incorporating and enhancing pest resistance in crops is yet to be realized. It is pos- 
sible  to  derive  genome  editing-mediated  resistance  against  insects  by  targeting  
either the host genes or the gene drive in insect populations. There is a dearth of  
information with regard to insect-susceptibility genes of host plants, specifically in  
rice. The recessive resistance genes identified so far are likely to represent nonfunc- 
tional susceptibility genes and hence the need for more studies to characterize such  
candidate genes, which represent ideal targets for genome editing to develop new  
sources of resistance. Alternatively, novel resistance alleles can be created in sus- 
ceptible rice cultivars either by replacement of a few nucleotides/motifs/domains or  
by editing of specific bases or transfer of a complete gene. However, precise replace- 
ment of nucleotides, base editing, and insertion of a gene through CRISPR technol- 
ogy are relatively complex at this stage and it may require a few more years for  
researchers in not-so-sophisticated laboratories to be able to use this technology. 
   Gene drive is another highly potential technology that can be exploited to pro- 
mote  the  inheritance  of  CRISPR-generated  mutated  alleles  or  any  other  DNA  
sequence by sexual reproduction, which allows a rapid spread of genes among the  
insect population. Even the whole CRISPR machinery, that is, Cas9 mRNA and  
specific sgRNAs, can be spread into insect populations via a gene drive. Besides  
controlling the insect population, it can decrease vector-borne virus diseases such as  
rice  tungro  disease.  However,  its  application  requires  a  thorough  public  debate  
among  scientists,  policymakers,  and  regulators  and  other  stakeholders  (Courtier-  
Orgogozo et al. 2017). In addition, the rapid advancement in genome editing tech- 
nologies  will  facilitate  the  functional  analysis  of  insect  genes,  which  would  
indirectly help in developing more effective strategies for achieving effective and  
durable biotic stress resistance in crops. 

4     Transgenic Approach Through Gene Transfer 

As naturally occurring resistance to lepidopteran pests of rice is yet to be identified/ 
discovered  (e.g.,  stem  borers  and  leaffolders;  Schuler  et  al.  1998),  transgenesis  
offers a potent, immediate, cost-effective, and environment-friendly option for con- 
trol of these pests through access and use of resistance from unrelated sources (i.e.,  
nonrice sources). Fortunately, tissue culture and genetic transformation protocols  

----------------------- Page 410-----------------------

400                                                                                                  J. S. Bentur et al. 

are well established in rice and many bacterial-derived insecticidal proteins have  
been deployed in rice through transgenic breeding (Sundaram et al. 2013). Bt genes  
derived from the soil bacterium Bacillus thuringiensis have been the most success- 
ful group of related genes used commercially for genetic transformation of many  
crop plants, including rice. Bt genes encode for insecticidal proteins that are filled  
in crystalline inclusion bodies produced by the bacterium upon sporulation (e.g.,  
Cry protein) or expressed during bacterial growth (e.g., Vip proteins). In addition,  
several research groups are assessing the potential of using non-Bt insecticidal pro- 
teins   such   as   lectins   (carbohydrate-binding   proteins),   proteinase   inhibitors,  
ribosome- inactivating  proteins,  secondary  plant  metabolites,  small  RNA  viruses,  
etc. (Makkar and Bentur 2017). 

4.1       Development of Transgenic Rice for Insect Resistance  

The  crystal  insecticidal  proteins  (Cry  toxins  or  delta-endotoxins)  encoded  by  Bt  
genes are known to possess high toxicity to lepidopteran pests (Cohen et al. 2000),  
Dipterans (Andrews et al.  1987), and Coleopterans (Krieg et al.  1983; Herrnstadt  
et al.  1986) but are nontoxic to other groups of insects, other animals, and humans.  
Fujimoto et al. ( 1993) reported the first transformation of rice with a Bt gene. Many  
reports on the development and evaluation of Bt rice lines have since appeared (see  
review  by  High  et  al.  2004;  Chen  et  al.  2006).  Rice  lines  expressing  Cry1Aa,  
Cry1Ab, Cry1Ac, Cry1Ab/Cry1Ac fusion gene,  Cry1B, Cry1C, Cry2A, and a pyra- 
mid of Cry1Ac with Cry2A, under the control of various constitutive and conditional  
promoters, have been shown to confer resistance to stem borers, leaffolders, and  
other foliage-feeding lepidopteran insects (Table  2). Several rice lines expressing  
insecticidal genes with anti-lepidopteran activity using Cry genes (Cry1Aa, Cry1Ab,  
Cry1Ac, Cry1Ab/Ac, Cry1C, Cry2A), CpTI (cowpea trypsin inhibitor), Vip (vegeta- 
tive insecticidal protein), etc., have been reported. Various transgenic Bt (Cry1Ab,  
Cry1Ac) rice varieties (IR64, Karnal Local, etc.) resistant to YSB have been pro- 
duced in India (Khanna and Raina 2002; Ramesh et al. 2004a). Pradhan et al. (2016)  
deployed a vegetative insecticidal protein (vip) in the genetic background of Swarna  
and demonstrated that the transgenic rice is resistant to multiple lepidopteran pests  
such as yellow stem borer, leaffolder, and rice horny caterpillar. Field evaluation  
and validation of transgenic rice possessing Cry1A (Shu et al. 2000; Tu et al. 2000)  
and synthetic Cry1Ab (Shu et al. 2002) have been reported from China. Field trials  
of Bt rice have also been conducted in Pakistan (Bashir et al. 2005; Mahmood-ur-  
Rahman  et  al.  2007),  Spain  (Breitler  et  al.  2004),  Iran  (James  2005),  and  India  
(Bunsha 2006). Iran was the first country to release Bt rice for commercial cultiva- 
tion in 2004 (Makkar and Bentur 2017). China permitted the commercial produc- 
tion of Bt rice lines Huahui No. 1 (CMS restorer line) and Bt Shanyou 63 (a hybrid  
of Huahui No. 1 and Zhenshan 97A, a CMS line), both lines expressing Cry1Ab/Ac  
fusion gene (Chen et al. 2011), but cultivation was discontinued afterward. Currently,  
no  Bt  rice  is  grown  in  any  country  across  the  world,  including  China,  although  

----------------------- Page 411-----------------------

Molecular Approaches for Insect Pest Management in Rice                                            401 

Table 2   List of transgenes used in rice transformation to provide insect resistance 

                                                                      Reported  
         Transgene(s)        Recipient rice variety/  Promoter        resistant  
 S. No.  deployed            genotype                 deployed        against          Reference(s) 
 Lepidopteran pests 
 1       cry1Ab              IR58 (indica rice)       CaMV35S         Yellow stem      Wunn et al.  
                                                                      borer, striped   (1996) 
                                                                      stem borer,  
                                                                      leaffolder 
 2       PINII (potato       Japonica rice            –               Pink stem        Duan et al.  
         proteinase                                                   borer            (1996) 
         inhibitor) 
 3       cry1Ab              Japonica, Taipei 309     Rice actin-1    Yellow stem      Wu et al.  
                                                      promoter        borer            (1997a) 
 4       cry1A, cowpea       Japonica, Taipei 309,    –               Yellow stem      Wu et al.  
         proteinase          and Taipei 85-93.                        borer            (1997b) 
         inhibitor gene      Indica, Minghui 63,  
                             and Qingliu Rai 
 5       cry1AC              IR64 (indica rice)       Maize           Yellow stem      Nayak et al.  
                                                      ubiquitin 1     borer            (1997) 
                                                      promoter 
 6       cry1Aa, cry 1Ac,   Indica, japonica          –               Yellow stem      Lee et al.  
         cry2A, cry1C                                                 borer            (1997) 
 7       cry1Ab              Aromatic rice, Tarom     –               Yellow stem      Ghareyazie  
                             molaii                                   borer            et al. ( 1997) 
 8       cry2A               Basmati 370 and M7       CaMV35S         Yellow stem      Maqbool et al.  
                             (indica rice)            promoter        borer,           (1998) 
                                                                      leaffolder 
 9       cry1Ab              Indica and japonica      –               Yellow stem      Datta et al.  
                             rice                                     borer            (1998) 
 10      cry1Ab, cry1Ac,     Japonica rice            Maize           Yellow stem      Cheng et al.  
         hph, gus genes                               ubiquitin       borer, striped   (1998) 
                                                      promoter, the   stem borer 
                                                      CaMV 35S  
                                                      promoter,  
                                                      and the  
                                                      Brassica  
                                                      Bp10 gene  
                                                      promoter 
 11      cry1Ab              Maintainer line          35S             Yellow stem      Alam et al.  
                             IR68899B                 constitutive    borer            (1999) 
                                                      promoter 
 12      cry1Ab              Vaidehi (indica rice)    –               Yellow stem      Alam et al.  
                                                                      borer            (1998) 
 13      cry1Ab              PR16 and PR18            Maize           Yellow stem      Ye et al.  
                                                      ubiquitin       borer            (2000) 
                                                      promoter 

                                                                                           (continued) 

----------------------- Page 412-----------------------

402                                                                                    J. S. Bentur et al. 

Table 2   (continued) 

                                                                        Reported  
          Transgene(s)        Recipient rice variety/   Promoter        resistant  
 S. No.   deployed            genotype                  deployed        against          Reference(s) 
  14      cry1Ab, cry1Ac      Minghui 63 (indica        Rice actin-1    Yellow stem      Tu et al.  
                              CMS restorer line)        promoter        borer and        (2000) 
                              and its derived hybrid                    leaffolder 
                              rice Shanyou 63 
  15      cry1Ab              KMD1 (japonica elite      –               Yellow stem      Shu et al.  
                              line)                                     borer            (2000) 
  16      cry1A, cry1Ab,      Indica rice               –               Yellow stem      Intikhab et al.  
          cry1Ac, cry1c                                                 borer            (2000) 
          and cry2A 
  17      cry1Ab, Xa21        Pusa Basmati 1            –               Yellow stem      Gosal et al.  
                              (indica rice)                             borer,           (2000) 
                                                                        Bacterial  
                                                                        blight disease 
  18      CRY1AB              KMD1 and KMD2             –               Yellow stem      Ye et al.  
                                                                        borer, striped   (2001) 
                                                                        stem borer 
  19      cry1Ac, cry2A,      M7 and Basmati 370        Maize           Yellow stem      Maqbool et al.  
          snowdrop lectin     (indica rice varieties)   ubiquitin-1     borer,           (2001) 
          gna                                           promoter,       leaffolder,  
                                                        CaMV 35S        and BPH 
                                                        promoter 
  20      cry1Ab              IR64 (indica rice)        –               Yellow stem      Maiti et al.  
                                                                        borer            (2001) 
  21      Spider              Xiushuill and             –               Leaffolder       Huang et al.  
          insecticidal gene   Chunjiang 11                              and striped      (2001) 
                                                                        stem borer 
  22      cry1Ac gene         Minghui 81                Maize           Striped stem     Zeng et al.  
                                                        ubiquitin-1     borer            (2002) 
                                                        promoter 
  23      cry1Ac gene         Pusa Basmati-1,           Maize           Yellow stem      Khanna and  
                              IR64, and Karnal          ubiquitin-1     borer            Raina (2002) 
                              Local (indica rice)       promoter 
  24      Bt fusion gene      IR72 (indica rice)        –               Yellow stem      Datta et al.  
          (for insect                                                   borer,           (2002) 
          resistance),                                                  bacterial  
         Xa21 gene (for                                                 blight  
          BLB), chitinase                                               disease,  
          gene (sheath                                                  sheath blight  
          blight)                                                       disease 
  25      Chimeric Bt         IR68899B and              35S and         Yellow stem      Balachandran  
          gene, cry1Ab;       IR68897B                  PEPC            borer,           et al. (2002) 
          cry1Ab/cry1Ac       (maintainer lines),       promoters;      leaffolder 
          fusion gene         MH63 and BR827-           actin 1  
                              35R (restorer lines)      promoter 

                                                                                             (continued) 

----------------------- Page 413-----------------------

Molecular Approaches for Insect Pest Management in Rice                                               403 

Table 2   (continued) 

                                                                        Reported  
          Transgene(s)        Recipient rice variety/   Promoter        resistant  
 S. No.   deployed            genotype                  deployed         against          Reference(s) 
 26       cry1Ab,             Rajalele (javanica        –                Yellow stem      Slamet et al.  
          snowdrop lectin     progenies)                                borer,            (2003) 
          gna                                                           planthoppers 
 27       cry1Ac              IR64, Pusa                Maize            Yellow stem      Raina et al.  
                              Basmati-1, and            ubiquitin       borer             (2003) 
                              Karnal Local (indica      promoter 
                              rice) 
 28       cry1Ac, cry2A       Basmati (indica rice)     PEPC             Yellow stem      Husnain et al.  
                                                        promoter and   borer              (2003) 
                                                        PB 10  
                                                        (pollen-  
                                                        specific)  
                                                        promoter 
 29       cry1Ac, Xa21        Pusa Basmati-1            –                Yellow stem      Gosal et al.  
                              (indica rice)                             borer,            (2003) 
                                                                        bacterial  
                                                                        blight 
 30       CRY1AB,             IR58025A,                 Maize            Yellow stem      Ramesh et al.  
          CRY1AC genes;       IR58025B, and             ubiquitin       borer             (2004b) 
          bar gene for        Vajram (indica rice)      promoter,  
          herbicide                                     CaMV 35S  
          resistance                                    promoter  
                                                        (for BAR  
                                                        gene) 
 31       cry1B, cry1Aa       Ariete and Senia          ubi 1            Striped stem     Breitler et al.  
                                                        promoter or     borer             (2004) 
                                                        mpi  
                                                        promoter 
 32       cry1Ab, cry1Ac,     Indica rice               –                Yellow stem      Alcantara et al.  
          cry1C, cry2A,                                                 borer, Striped    (2004) 
          cry9C                                                          stem borer 
 33       mpi gene (maize     Senia and Ariete          Maize            Striped stem     Vila et al.  
          proteinase                                    ubiquitin 1     borer             (2005) 
          inhibitor)                                    promoter 
 34       cry2A               Minghui 63 (indica        Maize            Yellow stem      Chen et al.  
                              restorer line)            ubiquitin       borer             (2005) 
                                                        promoter 
 35       cry1Ac, cry2A       Basmati line B-370        –                Yellow stem      Bashir et al.  
                              (indica rice)                             borer,            (2005) 
                                                                        leaffolder 
 36       cry1Ac, cry2A       Basmati 370 (indica       Ubiquitin        Yellow stem      Riaz et al.  
                              rice)                     promoter and   borer              (2006) 
                                                        CaMV 35S  
                                                        promoter 

                                                                                              (continued) 

----------------------- Page 414-----------------------

404                                                                                    J. S. Bentur et al. 

Table 2   (continued) 

                                                                        Reported  
          Transgene(s)        Recipient rice variety/   Promoter        resistant  
 S. No.   deployed            genotype                  deployed        against          Reference(s) 
  37      cry1Ab-1B           Elite                     Maize           Yellow stem      Ho et al.  
          (translationally    Vietnamese cultivars      ubiquitin       borer            (2006) 
          fused gene) and                               promoter and  
          cry1A/cry1Ac                                  rice actin-1  
          (hybrid Bt gene)                              promoter 
  38      PINII (potato       Pusa basmati-1 and        Pin2            Yellow stem      Bhutani et al.  
          proteinase          Tarori Basmati            wound-          borer            (2006) 
          inhibitor)          (indica rice) and         inducible  
                              TNG67 (japonica           promoter 
                              rice) 
  39      cry2Ab gene         Minghui 63 (indica        –               Yellow stem      Tang and Lin  
                              restorer                                  borer,           (2007) 
                              line)/T(1Ab)-10                           leaffolder 
  40      cry1Ab              Korean varieties, P-I,    Maize           Yellow stem      Kim et al.  
                              P-II, P-III               ubiquitin       borer            (2008) 
                                                        promoter 
  41      cry1Ab gene         Khazar, Neda, and         –               Striped stem     Kiani et al.  
                              Nemat                                     borer            (2008) 
  42      Ten transgenic      Minghui 63 (elite         –               Yellow stem      Chen et al.  
          lines (two          indica restorer line)                     borer, striped   (2008) 
          cry1Ac lines,                                                 stem borer 
          three cry2A  
          lines, five cry9C  
          lines) 
  43      cry1C               Zhonghua 11 (Oryza        rbcS            Yellow stem      Ye et al.  
                              sativa L. subsp.          promoter        borer, striped   (2009) 
                              japonica)/RJ5 line.                       stem borer,  
                                                                        leaffolder 
  44      cry1Ia5             Oryza sativa              –               Yellow stem      Moghaieb  
                                                                        borer            (2010) 
  45      cry1b and           Oryza sativa              PEPC            Yellow stem      Kumar et al.  
          cry1Aa fusion                                 promoter        borer            (2010) 
          gene 
  46      cry1Ab and          G6H1, G6H2, G6H3,         –               Striped stem     Chen et al.  
          Vip3H fusion        G6H4, G6H5, G6H6                          borer, pink      (2010) 
          gene                                                          stem borer 
  47      cry1Ab, cry1Ac      Bt-SY63                   –               Striped stem     Zhang et al.  
          fusion gene                                                   borer            (2011) 
  48      cry1Ac, CpTI        Bt-KF6                    –               Striped stem     Zhang et al.  
          genes                                                         borer            (2011) 
  49      cry1Ab              Bt-DL                     –               Striped stem     Zhang et al.  
                                                                        borer            (2011) 

                                                                                             (continued) 

----------------------- Page 415-----------------------

Molecular Approaches for Insect Pest Management in Rice                                             405 

Table 2   (continued) 

                                                                       Reported  
         Transgene(s)        Recipient rice variety/   Promoter        resistant  
 S. No.  deployed            genotype                  deployed        against          Reference(s) 
  50     cry1Ab, cry1Ac,     Minghui 63 (elite         Maize           Yellow stem      Yang et al.  
         cry1C, cry2A        indica restorer line)     ubiquitin       borer, striped   (2011) 
                                                       promoter        stem borer,  
                                                                       leaffolder 
  51      Cry1Ac,            Rice                      pGreen          Striped stem     Yang et al.  
         cry1I-like gene                                               borer,           (2014) 
                                                                       leaffolder 
  52     cry1Ab gene         Mfb-MH86                  Ubiquitin       Striped stem     Wang et al.  
                                                       promoter        borer and        (2014) 
                                                                       other  
                                                                       lepidopteran  
                                                                       pests 
  53     mpi-pci fusion      Ariete                    mpi             Striped stem     Quilis et al.  
         gene                                          promoter        borer            (2014) 
  54     Ds-Bt               Zhejing-22,               –               Striped stem     Gao et al.  
                             Kongyu-131                                borer            (2014) 
  55     cry1Ac, cry1lg,     Xiushui 134               Maize           Striped stem     Zhao (2015) 
         G10 (EPSPS                                    ubiquitin       borer,  
         gene)                                         promoter        leaffolder,  
                                                       (pUBi)/         and  
                                                       modified        glyphosate 
                                                       cauliflower  
                                                       35S  
                                                       promoter 
 Sucking pests 
  56      GNA (Galanthus   ?                           Phloem-         BPH              Rao et al.  
         nivalis                                       specific                         (1998) 
         agglutinin)                                   rice-sucrose-  
                                                       synthase 
  57      GNA                ASD16/M12                 Rice sucrose    BPH and          Foissac et al.  
                                                       synthase/       GLH              (2000) 
                                                       maize  
                                                       ubiquitin 
  58      GNA                ?                         ?               SBPH             Wu et al.  
                                                                                        (2002) 
  59      GNA                Chaitanya and             Phloem-         BPH, GLH,        Nagadhara  
                             Phalguna, indica          specific        and WBPH         et al. (2003,  
                             cultivars                 rice-sucrose-                    2004) 
                                                       synthase 
  60      GNA                                                          BPH, GLH,        Ramesh et al.  
                                                                       and WBPH         (2004a, b) 
  61      GNA                Zhuxian B, an indica                      BPH              Li et al. (2005) 
                             rice 

                                                                                            (continued) 

----------------------- Page 416-----------------------

406                                                                                      J. S. Bentur et al. 

Table 2   (continued) 

                                                                          Reported  
          Transgene(s)        Recipient rice variety/    Promoter         resistant  
 S. No.   deployed            genotype                   deployed         against          Reference(s) 
 62       ASAL (Allium        IR64                       CaMV35S          BPH and          Saha et al.  
          sativum                                                         GLH              (2006) 
          agglutinin) 
 63       ASAL                Chaitanya and              CaMV35S          BPH, GLH,        Yarasi et al.  
                              BPT5204, indica                             and WBPH         (2008) 
                              cultivars 
 64       ASAL                IR64                       CaMV35S          BPH and          Sengupta et al.  
                                                                          GLH              (2010) 
 65       DB1/G95A-           Tachisugata                Phloem-          BPH              Yoshimura  
          mALS                                           specific                          et al. (2012) 
          (Dioscoria                                     rice-sucrose-  
          batata tuber                                   synthase 
          lectin) 
 66       ASAL                 ?                         Phloem-          BPH              Chandrasekhar  
                                                         specific                          et al. (2014) 
                                                         rice-sucrose-  
                                                         synthase 
 67       Loop                In vitro assay             –                BPH              Shao et al.  
          replacements                                                                     (2016) 
          with gut-binding  
          peptides in  
          Cry1Ab domain  
          II 
 68       Cry64Ba and         report                                      Effective        Liu et al.  
          Cry64Ca                                                         against          (2018) 
                                                                          sap-sucking  
                                                                          insects 

several such transgenic rice lines have been deregulated by the respective regulatory  
authorities of these countries due to various policy-related issues. 
    Genetic engineering for the control of planthopper and leafhopper pests of rice  
has begun with the use of plant-derived lectin genes. The snowdrop lectin gene,  
Galanthus nivalis agglutinin (GNA), has been transferred to several rice varieties  
and has been shown to provide partial to complete resistance to planthoppers and  
leafhoppers. Partial resistance to leafhoppers and planthoppers was demonstrated  
by rice transformation with a lectin gene from garlic (Allium sativum leaf agglutinin  
gene, ASAL ; Saha et al. 2006). Bala et al. (2013) reported that ASAL interacts with  
NADH quinone oxidoreductase (NQO), a key player in the electron transport chain,  
and results in toxicity and increased mortality of BPH in transgenic rice lines. This  
study also demonstrated that, among all the transgenes available for control of suck- 
ing  pests, ASAL  holds  significant  promise,  particularly  against  BPH.  Yoshimura  
et  al.  (2012)  developed  transgenic  rice  possessing  lectin1  gene  from  Dioscorea  
batatas under the control of a phloem-specific promoter (i.e., promoter of sucrose  
synthase-1 gene) that showed a 30% decrease in the survival rate of BPH. Even  

----------------------- Page 417-----------------------

Molecular Approaches for Insect Pest Management in Rice                                                 407 

though,  in  general,  it  is  known  that  Cry  proteins  are  ineffective  against  sucking  
pests, through loop replacements with gut-binding peptides in  Cry1AB domain II,  
enhanced toxicity against BPH has been demonstrated (Shao et al. 2016). Liu et al.  
(2018) have shown the effectivity of Cry64Ba and Cry64Ca, two ETX/MTX2-type  
Bt  proteins,  against  hemipteran  pests.  Boddupally  et  al.  (2018)  recently  demon- 
strated that the expression of hybrid fusion protein (Cry1Ac::ASAL) in transgenic  
rice plants imparted resistance against multiple insect pests: BPH, stem borer, and  
leaffolder. The list of transgenes deployed for the control of sucking pests such as  
BPH is summarized in Table 2. 

5      Insect-Plant Interactions at the Genomic Level 

5.1      Planthopper Genomes  

The genome of BPH and its endosymbionts have been sequenced (Xue et al. 2014).  
It is a large genome (1141 Mb) with 27,571 protein-coding genes, of which 16,330  
are specific to this species. In comparison, the WBPH genome is relatively smaller  
(720 Mb) with 21,254 protein-coding genes (L Wang et al. 2017a), while the SBPH  
genome  size  is  541  Mb  with  17,736  protein-coding  genes  (Zhu  et  al.  2017c).  
Mitochondrial  (mt)  genomes  of  these  three  planthopper  species  have  also  been  
sequenced (Zhang et al. 2013, 2014). These studies are now providing insights into  
the genetic plasticity of this group, possible causes of rapid evolution of virulent  
biotypes, and resistance against a wide range of synthetic insecticides. In addition,  
the role of endosymbionts such as yeast-like symbiont (YLS) and Wolbachia spp. in  
enhancing  insect  fitness  is  being  studied.  Additional  genetic  markers  are  being  
developed for studying population genetics, individual differences, and the phylo- 
geography of planthoppers. Several key genes of the insects have been identified,  
which   can   be   targeted   for   RNAi-based   genetic   tools   of   pest   management.  
Transcriptomics of the salivary gland has revealed more than 350 secretory proteins,  
of which several, such as NlSEF1 (W Ye et al. 2017a), act as effectors modulating  
plant defense response. Likewise, muscin-like protein of the salivary gland secre- 
tion of BPH (Huang et al.  2017; Shangguan et al. 2018) and WBPH (Miao et al.  
2018) is likely to be an effector. Such genes can be suitable targets for their control  
using  an  RNAi-based  approach  described  above. A  high  number  of  cytochrome  
P450 genes and their functional diversification are attributed to drive the evolution  
of  insecticide  resistance  and  virulence  against  host-plant  resistance  (Peng  et  al.  
2017; Zimmer et al. 2018). In spite of efforts to map virulence loci onto the BPH  
genome (Jing et al. 2014; Kobayashi et al. 2014), no aviR gene has yet been cloned  
and  characterized. Although  mitochondrial  markers  based  on  mt  genes  COI  and  
ND4 have been screened for population differentiation, the results have not been  
encouraging over large populations across countries. Further, Zhang et al. (2013)  
suggest that markers based on the control region of the mt genome might provide  
more reliable markers for studying population genetics and the phylogeography of  
planthoppers. 

----------------------- Page 418-----------------------

408                                                                                                     J. S. Bentur et al. 

5.2       Rice-Planthopper Interactions  

Using both candidate gene cloning and a characterization-based approach and func- 
tional genomics-based omics approaches, attempts are being made to understand  
planthopper and rice interactions. Based on initial information on the nature of R  
genes as being members of the NBS-LRR class or receptor kinase class, the rice  
resistance mechanism against BPH is, rather hurriedly, aligned to rice resistance  
against pathogens under two-tier immunity involving pattern-triggered immunity  
(PTI) and effector-triggered immunity (ETI) and the involvement of both JA- and  
SA-mediated pathways (Jing et al. 2017). Even the cloned genes are assigned to PTI  
(Bph3, Bph15) or ETI (Bph14, Bph1/10/18) tiers. However, what is not accounted  
for is the lack of documented evidence of hypersensitive reaction (HR) and systemic  
acquired  resistance  (SAR),  which  are  hallmarks  of  plant  response  to  biotrophic  
pathogens. Further, resistance in rice against planthoppers is not at the immune level  
but with moderate antibiosis coupled with antifeeding and antixenosis components.  
It is generally understood that SA- and JA-mediated plant defenses act reciprocally  
antagonistic  to  each  other  with  adaptive  significance  (Thaler  et  al.  2012).  Such  
antagonism has not been convincingly illustrated in the case of planthopper resis- 
tance in rice. Thus, greater understanding of planthopper-rice interactions is needed. 

5.3       Rice-Gall Midge Interactions  

Although  genome  sequence  data  for ARGM  are  yet  to  be  published  (Nair  et  al.  
unpublished),  the  mitogenome  has  been  sequenced  (Atray  et  al.  2015)  and  the  
microbiome analyzed in different stages of the life cycle of the insect (Ojha et al.  
2017). Based on identification and functional analysis of candidate genes, global  
gene expression profiles and differential gene expressions detected through SSH  
cDNA libraries, microarray studies, and the pyrosequencing approach in both the  
plants and the insect rice-gall midge interactions have been fairly well studied. In  
essence, with results from these studies indicating strategies used by both the pest  
and the host to defeat each other, defense ploys can be termed as a battle for survival  
(Bentur et al. 2016; Sinha et al. 2017). 
     During the infestation process and subsequent feeding on the host, the larvae  
inject substance(s) into the host. As in the case of pathogenic bacteria and fungi,  
these products could be determinants (effectors) of the avirulence/virulence phe- 
nomenon. Extending this idea further, the genes that encode these molecules could  
be determinants of gall midge biotypes. Further, the genes that encode such mole- 
cules could be those that encode secreted salivary gland proteins (SSGPs). Therefore,  
characterizing genes that encode SSGPs could provide a handle to study this inter- 
action and also gain valuable insight into the process of infestation of rice by this  
pest. The expression patterns of some of these SSGPs in larvae interacting with a  
susceptible host (SH; compatible interaction) or resistant host (RH; incompatible  
interaction)   indicated   that   some   of   the   SSGPs   such   as   gamma   subunit   of  

----------------------- Page 419-----------------------

Molecular Approaches for Insect Pest Management in Rice                                      409 

oligosaccharyl transferase (OoOST) and nucleoside diphosphate kinase (OoNDPK)  
overexpress when interacting with SH compared with those in maggots when feed- 
ing on RH (Sinha et al. 2011a, 2012a). Furthermore, NDPK protein has been dem- 
onstrated  to  influence  the  host  physiology.  In  contrast,  two  genes,  OoprotI  and  
OoprotII, homologous to serine proteases, and  OoDAD1 (defender against death)  
overexpress in midgut of the maggots feeding on RH when compared with those  
feeding on SH (Sinha et al. 2011b, 2015). Although the former interactions repre- 
sent effector-induced susceptibility, the latter set forms neutralizers attempting to  
overcome plant-secreted defensive toxins. Earlier studies also brought out similari- 
ties  in  rice  defense  expression  against  gall  midge  with  those  seen  against  plant  
pathogens (Rawat et al. 2010, 2013), complete with HR and SAR. Subsequent anal- 
ysis of SSH-generated cDNA libraries and microarray data brought out differences  
in  the  defense  pathways  underlying  HR+-type  and  HR−-type  resistance  (Rawat  
et al. 2012b), among the two HR-type resistances conferred by Gm1 and Gm8 genes  
(Divya et al. 2016, 2018b), and also the diversity in susceptibility pathways in rice  
genotypes with ineffective R-genes against virulent biotypes (Rawat et al. 2012a).  
Generally,  in  the  three  gall  midge-susceptible  rice  varieties  studied,  the  insect-  
challenged  plants  tend  to  step  up  metabolism  and  transport  of  nutrients  to  their  
feeding site and have suppressed defense responses. However, one of the rice variet- 
ies mounted an elevated defense response during early hours of infestation, only to  
be overpowered later, eventually resulting in host-plant susceptibility. 
    Pyrosequencing-based transcriptome analysis of ARGM revealed a differential  
response of the midge depending on whether it is in a compatible or incompatible  
interaction with its host (Sinha et al. 2012b). A recent study with sequencing of 16S  
rRNA bacterial gene (V3-V4 region) revealed differences in the microflora of the  
gall  midge-rice  maggots  feeding  on  susceptible  or  resistant  rice  hosts.  Results  
revealed that  Wolbachia was the predominant bacterium in pupae and adults while  
Pseudomonas was predominant in maggots. Further, it was observed that members  
of proteobacteria were predominant across all the samples. There was high species  
diversity  in  maggots  isolated  from  susceptible  rice  and  a  high  representation  of  
unclassified  bacteria  in  maggots  isolated  from  resistant  rice. A  first  step  in  this  
direction  is  a  report  that  highlights  variation  in  the  microbiome  of  the  rice  gall  
midge, based on the host phenotype from which it was isolated, and results suggest  
that these variations could have an important role in the host’s susceptibility/resis- 
tance (Ojha et al. 2017). 
    The availability of the complete sequence of the gall midge mt genome and sub- 
sequent sequence analysis revealed the presence of two tandem repeat elements in  
the noncoding regions of the mt genome. Further, sequencing of the iterated regions  
demonstrated that the iterations of the repeat elements could not only differentiate  
different gall midge biotypes present in India but also were able to genetically sepa- 
rate the ARGM from its counterpart, the African rice gall midge (Atray et al. 2015).  
Thus, this study identified a reliable tool to monitor changes in the insect popula- 
tions so as to have an “early warning system” in place. Janique et al. (2017) reported  
that two noncoding repeat motifs observed in the mitogenome of ARGM in India  
were absent in Thai populations and these were replaced by an 89-bp noncoding  
sequence. 

----------------------- Page 420-----------------------

410                                                                                J. S. Bentur et al. 

6     Conclusions and Perspectives 

In terms of an evolutionary perspective, survival of neither the host nor the herbi- 
vore has ever been under threat. Understandably, however, over the past couple of  
millennia when half of the human population started depending on this one cereal  
as its staple food, conflict of interest erupted between these insects and humans. All  
feasible efforts were made to protect the crop from possible damage by insects dur- 
ing the early phase of domestication and cultivation of the rice crop. With the advent  
of modern scientific methods of crop husbandry, crop improvement, and synthetic  
chemicals, insect pests became targets of a frontal attack by humans. With quick  
development  of  resistance  against  a  range  of  synthetic  insecticides,  insect  pests  
proved  their  evolutionary  superiority,  compelling  humans  to  concede  defeat  and  
conclude that pest management was the best solution for sustainable productivity  
rather than pest eradication or control. Rice insect pest management has traversed  
the same course as that in other crops such as cotton. 
    Insect pest management is complex and fraught with many variables. From the  
foregoing account, it is quite clear that we are just beginning to understand and  
make inroads into the complex interactions between the pest and its host, rice. It is  
also  evident  that,  although  productivity  loss  due  to  these  insects  alone  runs  into  
several million US dollars, insects are rapidly overcoming any management strategy  
that we are able to deploy, whether it is resistance genes or the development of new  
pesticides. What this review hopes to highlight primarily is that as a central concept  
we need to know how the rice plant interacts with its several insect enemies from an  
evolutionary point of view. Against YSB, no high resistance is expressed, probably  
because it is a “k” strategist and monophagous insect that does not kill the host.  
Against gall midge with an intermediate population strategy displaying buck and  
boost cycles, the host plant has a diverse array of immune-level R-genes that are  
constantly evolving along with the virulence in the pest populations. In stark con- 
trast, the rice plant has stockpiled multiple major and minor R-genes against plan- 
thoppers, which are typical “r” strategists. Second, the molecular tools now available  
have provided novel products for deployment to alleviate pest-induced yield losses.  
Notable  among  these  are  gene-pyramided  elite  cultivars,  derived  from  marker-  
assisted selection, to manage multiple pests and their strains/biotypes (Divya et al.  
2018c). Also present is the array of transgenic rice lines with potent genes against  
all the guilds of insect pests. It is unfortunate that these products are not yet avail- 
able for commercial use. Molecular approaches have also broadened our knowledge  
and identified unexplored facets for possible use in pest management. Finally, this  
flush  in  information  has  reiterated  the  evolutionary  advantage  of  insect  genome,  
mitogenome, and metagenome in facing any future challenges. A recent report on  
quick  field  selection  for  dsRNA  resistance  in  western  corn  rootworm  (Khajuria  
et al.  2018) exemplifies this. As summarized, representatives of each insect guild  
have evolved their own strategy to overcome plant resistance. Considering that, in  
the coming years, we are likely to be under pressure to grow more in less area, it is  
therefore imperative that we cut the losses in productivity due to insect pests.  

----------------------- Page 421-----------------------

Molecular Approaches for Insect Pest Management in Rice                                            411 

We  have made rapid strides in the past couple of decades toward this goal with  
emerging new tools and strategies. What is also clear is that the solution to the insect  
problem is unlikely to come from one area of study but from an amalgamation of  
information obtained from several different studies that can provide durable, effec- 
tive, and targeted resistance to insect pests of rice. The caveat is that this is unlikely  
to be a one-time effort but must be a continuing one. 

References 

Abhilash Kumar V, Balachiranjeevi C, Naik BS et al (2017) Marker-assisted pyramiding of bacte- 
    rial blight and gall midge resistance genes into RPHR-1005, the restorer line of the popular rice  
    hybrid DRRH-3. Mol Breed 37:86. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11032- 017- 0687- 8 
Agarwal S, Mohan M, Mangrauthia SK (2012) RNAi: machinery and role in pest and disease  
    management. In: Venkateshwarlu B, Shankar AK, Shankar C, Maheshwari M (eds) Crop stress  
    and its management: perspectives and strategies. Springer, New York, pp 447–469 
Aglawe  SB,  Barbadikar  KM,  Mangrauthia  SK,  Madhav  MS  (2018)  New  breeding  technique  
    “genome editing” for crop improvement: applications, potentials and challenges. 3 Biotech  
    8(8):336 
Alam MF, Datta K, Abrigo E et al (1998) Production of transgenic deep water indica rice plants  
    expressing a synthetic Bacillus thuringiensis cry1Ab gene with enhanced resistance to yellow  
    stem borer. Plant Sci 135(1):25–30 
Alam MF, Abrigo E, Datta K et al (1999) Transgenic insect resistance maintainer line (IR68899B)  
    for improvement of hybrid rice. Plant Cell Rep 18:572–575 
Alcantara  EP, Aguda  RM,  Curtiss A  et  al  (2004)  Bacillus  thuringiensis  delta  endotoxin  bind- 
    ing  to  brush  border  membrane  vesicles  of  rice  stem  borers. Arch  Insect  Biochem  Physiol  
    55(4):169–177. https://doi.org/10.1002/arch.10128 
Amudhan S, Prasad Rao U, Bentur JS (1999) Total phenol profile in some rice varieties in relation  
    to infestation by Asian rice gall midge Orseolia oryzae (Wood-Mason). Curr Sci 76:1577–1580 
Andrews RW, Faust R, Wabiko MH et al (1987) The biotechnology of Bacillus thuringiensis. Crit  
    Rev Biotechnol 6:163–232. https://doi.org/10.3109/07388558709113596 
Arora L, Narula A (2017) Gene editing and crop improvement using CRISPR-Cas9 system. Front  
    Plant Sci 8:1932. https://doi.org/10.3389/fpls.2017.01932 
Atray I, Bentur JS, Nair S (2015) The Asian rice gall midge (Orseolia oryzae) mitogenome has  
    evolved novel gene boundaries and tandem repeats that distinguish its biotypes. PLoS One  
    10(7):e0134625. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0134625 
Bala A, Roy A, Behura N, Hess D, Das S (2013) Insight to the mode of action of Allium sati - 
    vum leaf agglutinin (ASAL) expressing in T3 rice lines on brown planthopper. Am J Plant Sci  
    4:400–407 
Balachandran S, Chandel G, Alam M et al (2002) Improving hybrid rice through anther culture  
    and transgenic approaches. In: 4th International Symposium on Hybrid Rice. Hanoi, Vietnam.  
    IRRI, Los Baños, pp 105–118 
Bally J, Fishilevich E, Bowling AJ, Pence HE, Narva KE, Waterhouse PM (2018) Improved insect-  
    proofing: expressing double-stranded RNA in chloroplasts. Pest Manag Sci 74:1751–1758 
Bashir K, Husnain T, Fatima T, Riaz N, Makhdoom R, Riazuddin S (2005) Novel indica basmati  
    line (B-370) expressing two unrelated genes of Bacillus thuringiensis is highly resistant to two  
    lepidopteran insects in the field. Crop Prot 24:870–879 
Baum JA, Bogaert T, Clinton W et al (2007) Control of coleopteran insect pests through RNA  
    interference. Nat Biotechnol 25(11):1322–1326 

----------------------- Page 422-----------------------

412                                                                                     J. S. Bentur et al. 

Bentur JS (2007) Host-plant resistance to insects as a core of rice IPM. In: Aggarwal PK, Ladha  
    JK, Singh RK, Devkumar C, Hardy B (eds) Science, technology, and trade for peace and pros- 
    perity.  Proceedings  of  the  26th  International  Rice  Research  Conference,  New  Delhi,  India,  
    9–12  October  2006.  International  Rice  Research  Institute,  Indian  Council  of  Agricultural  
    Research, and National Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Los Baños, New Delhi, pp 419–435 
Bentur JS (2010) Insect pests of rice in India and their management. In: Reddy DV, Rao NP, Rao  
    KV (eds) Pests and pathogens: management strategies. BS Publications, Hyderabad, pp 1–42 
Bentur JS, Viratkamath BC (2008) Rice planthoppers strike back. Curr Sci 95:441–442 
Bentur JS, Pasalu IC, Sarma NP, Prasad Rao U, Mishra B (2003) Gall midge resistance in rice.  
    DRR technical bulletin #1. Directorate of Rice Research, Hyderabad. 20 p 
Bentur JS, Padmakumari AP, Jhansilakshmi V et al (2011) Insect resistance in rice. DRR technical  
    bulletin #51. Directorate of Rice Research, Hyderabad. 86 p 
Bentur JS, Rawat N, Divya D, Sinha DK, Agarrwal R, Atray I, Nair S (2016) Rice-gall midge inter- 
    actions:  battle  for  survival.  J  Insect  Physiol  84:40–49.  dx.doi.org.  https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
    jinsphys.2015.09.008 
Bhutani S, Kumar R, Chauhan R et al (2006) Development of transgenic indica rice plants con- 
    taining potato proteinase inhibitor 2 gene with improved defense against yellow stem borer.  
    Physiol Mol Biol Plants 12(1):43–52 
Bi HL, Xu J, Tan AJ, Huang YP (2016) CRISPR/Cas9-mediated targeted gene mutagenesis in  
    Spodoptera litura. Insect Sci 23:469–477 
Boddupally D, Tamirisa S, Gundra SR, Vudem DR, Rao KV (2018) Expression of hybrid fusion  
    protein (Cry1Ac::ASAL) in transgenic rice plants imparts resistance against multiple insect  
    pests. Sci Rep 8:8458. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598- 018- 26881- 9 
Breitler JC, Vassal JM, Catala MDM et al (2004) Bt rice harbouring cry genes controlled by a consti- 
    tutive or wound-inducible promoter: protection and transgene expression under Mediterranean  
    field conditions. Plant Biotechnol J 2:417–430 
Bunsha  D  (2006)  Crops  on  trial.  Frontline  23(23)  http://www.hinduonnet.com/fline/fl2323/sto- 
    ries/20061201003603000.htm. Accessed 15 Jan 2008 
Cha YS, Ji H, Yun DW et al (2008) Fine mapping of the rice Bph1 gene, which confers resis- 
    tance to the brown planthopper (Nilaparvata lugens Stal), and development of STS mark- 
    ers for marker- assisted selection. Mol Cell 26:146–151 
Chandrasekhar  K,  Reddy  MG,  Singh  J, Vani  K, Vijayalakshmi  M,  Kaul T,  Reddy  MK  (2014)  
    Development of transgenic rice harbouring mutated rice 5-Enolpyruvylshikimate 3-Phosphate  
    Synthase (Os-mEPSPS) and Allium sativum leaf agglutinin (ASAL) genes conferring toler- 
    ance  to  herbicides  and  sap-sucking  insects.  Plant  Mol  Biol  Report  32(6):1146.  https://doi. 
    org/10.1007/s11105- 014- 0715- 3 
Chen H, Tang W, Xu C et al (2005) Transgenic indica rice plants harboring a synthetic cry2A gene  
    of  Bacillus  thuringiensis  exhibit  enhanced  resistance  against  lepidopteran  rice  pests. Theor  
    Appl Genet 111:1330–1337 
Chen M, Zhao JZ, Ye GY, Fu Q, Shelton AM (2006) Impact of insect-resistant transgenic rice on  
    target insect pests and non-target arthropods in China. Insect Sci 13:409–420 
Chen H, Zhang G, Zhang Q, Lin Y (2008) Effect of transgenic Bacillus thuringiensis rice lines on  
    mortality and feeding behavior of rice stem borers (Lepidoptera: Crambidae). J Econ Entomol  
    101:182–189. https://doi.org/10.1093/jee/101.1.182 
Chen Y, Tian J, Shen Z et al (2010) Transgenic rice plants expressing a fused protein of Cry1Ab/ 
    Vip3H have resistance to rice stem borers under laboratory and field conditions. J Econ Entomol  
    103(4):1444–1453. https://doi.org/10.1603/EC10014 
Chen M, Shelton A, Ye G (2011) Insect-resistant genetically modified rice in China: from research  
    to commercialization. Annu Rev Entomol 56:81–101 
Cheng X, Sardana R, Kaplan H et al (1998) Agrobacterium -transformed rice plants expressing  
    synthetic cry1A(b) and cry1A(c) genes are highly toxic to striped stem borer and yellow stem  
    borer. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 95(6):2767–2772. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.95.6.2767 

----------------------- Page 423-----------------------

Molecular Approaches for Insect Pest Management in Rice                                                 413 

Cohen MB, Romena AM, Gould F (2000) Dispersal by larvae of the stem borers  Scirpophaga  
    incertulas (Lepidoptera: Pyralidae) and Chilo suppressalis (Lepidoptera: Crambidae) in plots of  
    transplanted rice. Environ Entomol 29:958–971. https://doi.org/10.1603/0046- 225x- 29.5.958 
Courtier-Orgogozo V, Morizot B, Boëte C (2017) Agricultural pest control with CRISPR-based  
    gene drive: time for public debate. Should we use gene drive for pest control? EMBO Rep  
    18:878–880 
Datta K, Vasquez A, Tu J et al (1998) Constitutive and tissue specific differential expression of  
    cry1Ab  gene  in  transgenic  rice  plants  conferring  resistance  of  rice  insect  pest. Theor Appl  
    Genet 97:20–30 
Datta K, Baisakh N, Thet K et al (2002) Pyramiding transgenes for multiple resistance in rice  
    against bacterial blight, yellow stem borer and sheath blight. Theor Appl Genet 106:1–8 
Deutsch CA, Tewksbury JJ, Tigchelaar M et al (2018) Increase in crop losses to insect pests in a  
    warming climate. Science 361:916–919 
Divya D, Himabindu K, Nair S, Bentur JS (2015) Cloning of a gene encoding LRR protein and  
    its validation as candidate gall midge resistance gene, Gm4, in rice. Euphytica 203:185–195 
Divya D, Tunginba Singh Y, Nair S, Bentur JS (2016) Analysis of SSH library of rice variety  
    Aganni reveals candidate gall midge resistance genes. Funct Integr Genom 16:153–169 
Divya D, Nair S, Bentur JS (2018a) Expression profiles of key genes involved in rice gall midge  
    interactions reveal diversity in resistance pathways. Curr Sci 115:74–82 
Divya D, Sahu N, Nair S, Bentur JS (2018b) Map-based cloning and validation of a gall midge  
    resistance gene, Gm8, encoding a proline-rich protein in the rice variety Aganni. Mol Biol Rep  
    45:2075. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11033- 018- 4364- 8 
Divya D, Ratna Madhavi K, Dass MA et al (2018c) Expression profile of defense genes in rice  
    lines  pyramided  with  resistance  genes  against  bacterial  blight,  fungal  blast  and  insect  gall  
    midge. Rice 11:40 
Dong XT, Liao H, Zhu GH et al (2017) CRISPR/Cas9 mediated PBP1 and PBP3 mutagenesis  
    induced  significant  reduction  in  electrophysiological  response  to  sex  pheromones  in  male  
    Chilo suppressalis. Insect Sci 26:388. https://doi.org/10.1111/1744- 7917.12544 
Du B, Zhang W, Liu B et al (2009) Identification and characterization of Bph14, a gene conferring  
    resistance to brown planthopper in rice. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 106:22163–22168 
Du B, Chen R, He J (2020) Current understanding of the genomic, genetic, and molecular control  
    of insect resistance in rice. Mol Breed 40:24. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11032- 020- 1103- 3 
Duan X, Li X, Xue Q et al (1996) Transgenic rice plants harboring an introduced potato protein- 
    ase inhibitor II gene are insect resistant. Nat Biotechnol 14:494–498. https://doi.org/10.1038/ 
    nbt0496- 494 
Foissac X, Nguyen TL, Christou P, Gatehouse AMR, Gatehouse JA (2000) Resistance to green  
    leafhopper  (Nephotettix  virescens)  and  brown  planthopper  (Nilaparvata  lugens)  in  trans- 
    genic rice expressing snowdrop lectin (Galanthus nivalis agglutinin; GNA). J Insect Physiol  
    46:573–583 
Fujimoto H, Itoh K, Yamamoto M, Kyozuka J, Shimamoto K (1993) Insect-resistant rice gener- 
    ated by introduction of a modified endotoxin gene of Bacillus thuringiensis. Biotechnology  
    11:1151–1155 
Fujita D, Doi K, Yoshimura A, Yasui H (2004) Introgression of a resistance gene for green rice  
    leafhopper from Oryza nivara into cultivated rice, Oryza sativa L. Rice Genet Newsl 21:64–66 
Fujita D, Doi K, Yoshimura A, Yasui H (2006) Molecular mapping of a novel gene, Grh5, confer- 
    ring resistance to green rice leafhopper (Nephotettix cincticeps Uhler) in rice,  Oryza sativa  
    L. Theor Appl Genet 113:567–573 
Fujita D, Doi K, Yoshimura A, Yasui H (2010) A major QTL for resistance to green rice leafhopper  
    (Nephotettix cincticeps Uhler) derived from African rice (Oryza glaberrima Steud.). Breed Sci  
    60:336–341 
Fujita D, Kohli A, Horgan FG (2013) Rice resistance to planthoppers and leafhoppers. Crit Rev  
    Plant Sci 32:162–191 

----------------------- Page 424-----------------------

414                                                                                  J. S. Bentur et al. 

Fukuta T, Tamura K, Hirae M, Oya S (1998) Genetic analysis of resistance to green rice leafhopper  
    (Nephotettix cincticeps (Uhler)) in rice parental line, Norin-PL6, using RFLP markers. Breed  
    Sci 48:243–249 
Gao X, Zhou J, Li J et al (2014) Efficient generation of marker-free transgenic rice plants using  
    an improved transposon-mediated transgene reintegration strategy. Plant Physiol 167:11–24.  
    https://doi.org/10.1104/pp.114.246173 
Gatehouse  JA  (2008)  Biotechnological  prospects  for  engineering  insect-resistant  plants.  Plant  
    Physiol 146:881–887 
Ghareyazie B, Alinia F, Menguito CA et al (1997) Enhanced resistance to two stem borers in an  
    aromatic rice containing a synthetic CRY1A(B) gene. Mol Breed 3:401–404 
Gosal SS, Gill R, Sindhu AS et al (2000) Transgenic basmati rice carrying genes for stem borer  
    and bacterial leaf blight resistance. In: Proceedings International Rice Research Conference.  
    IRRI, Los Baños, pp 353–360 
Gosal SS, Gill R, Sindhu AS et al (2003) Introducing the cry1Ac gene into basmati rice and trans- 
    mitting transgenes to R3 progeny. In: Proceedings International Rice Research Conference.  
    IRRI, Los Baños, pp 558–560 
Harini AS, Lakshmi SS, Kumar SS, Sivaramakrishnan S, Kadirvel P (2010) Validation and fine-  
    mapping of genetic locus associated with resistance to brown planthopper [Nilaparvata lugens  
    (Stål.)] in rice (Oryza sativa L.). Asian J Biol Sci 5:32–37 
He K, Xiao H, Sun Y, Ding S, Situ G, Li F (2018) Transgenic microRNA-14 rice shows high resis- 
    tance to rice stem borer. Plant Biotechnol J 17:461. https://doi.org/10.1111/pbi.12990 
Heinrichs EA (1994) Biology and management of rice insects. Wiley Eastern Limited and New  
    Age International Limited, New Delhi. 779 p 
Heinrichs EA, Medrano FG, Rapusas HR (1985) Genetic evaluation for insect resistance in rice.  
    International Rice Research Institute, Los Baños. 352 p 
Heong KL, Hardy B (eds) (2010) Planthoppers: new threats to the sustainability of intensive rice  
    production systems in Asia. International Rice Research Institute, Los Baños. 460 p 
Herrnstadt C, Soares GG, Wilcox ER et al (1986) A new strain of Bacillus thuringiensis with activ- 
    ity against coleopteran insects. Nat Biotechnol 4:305–308 
High SM, Cohen MB, Shu QY, Altosaar I (2004) Achieving successful deployment of  Bt rice.  
    Trends Plant Sci 9:286–292 
Himabindu K, Suneetha K, Sama VSAK, Bentur JS (2010) A new rice gall midge resistance gene  
    in the breeding line CR57-MR1523, mapping with flanking markers and development of NILs.  
    Euphytica 174:179–187 
Hirabayashi H, Ideta O, Sato H et al (2004) Identification of a resistance gene to brown planthop- 
    per derived from Oryza minuta in rice. Breed Res 6(Suppl 1):285 
Ho NH, Baisakh N, Oliva N et al (2006) Translational fusion hybrid Bt genes confer resistance  
    against yellow stem borer in transgenic elite Vietnamese rice cultivars. Crop Sci 46:781–789 
Horgan  FG,  Ramal  AF,  Bentur  JS  et  al  (2016)  Virulence  of  brown  planthopper  (Nilaparvata  
    lugens) populations from South and South East Asia against resistant rice varieties. Crop Prot  
    78:222–231 
Hou LY, Ping YU, Qun XU et al (2011) Genetic analysis and preliminary mapping of two recessive  
    resistance genes to brown planthopper, Nilaparvata lugens Stål in rice. Rice Sci 18:238–242 
Huang J, Wei Z, An H et al (2001) Agrobacterium tumefaciens -mediated transformation of rice  
    with the spider insecticidal gene conferring resistance to leaffolder and striped stem borer. Cell  
    Res 11:149–155. https://doi.org/10.1038/sj.cr.7290080 
Huang D, Qiu Y, Zhang Y et al (2013) Fine-mapping and characterization of BPH27, a brown  
    planthopper  resistance  gene  from  wild  rice  (Oryza  rufipogon  Griff.).  Theor  Appl  Genet  
    126:219–229 
Huang HJ, Liu CW, Xu HJ, Bao YY, Zhang CX (2017) Mucin-like protein, a saliva component  
    involved in brown planthopper virulence and host adaptation. J Insect Physiol 98:223–230 
Husnain T, Bokhari SM, Riaz N et al (2003) Pesticidal genes of Bacillus thuringiensis in trans- 
    genic rice technology to breed insect resistance. Pak J Biochem Mol Biol 36(3):133–142 

----------------------- Page 425-----------------------

Molecular Approaches for Insect Pest Management in Rice                                               415 

Huvenne H, Smagghe G (2010) Mechanisms of dsRNA uptake in insects and potential of RNAi  
    for pest control: a review. J Insect Physiol 56:227–235 
Intikhab S, Karim S, Riazuddin S (2000) Natural variation among rice yellow stem borer and rice  
    leaffolder populations to C delta endotoxins. Pak J Biol Sci 3(8):1285–1289 
IRRI (International Rice Research Institute) (1979) Brown planthopper: threat to rice production  
    in Asia. IRRI, Los Baños. 369 p 
Jairin  J,  Phengrat  K,  Teangdeerith  S, Vanavichit A,  Toojinda  T  (2007a)  Mapping  of  a  broad-  
    spectrum  brown  planthopper  resistance  gene,  Bph3,  on  rice  chromosome  6.  Mol  Breed  
    19:35–44 
Jairin J, Teangdeerith SN, Leelagud P, Phengrat K, Vanavichit A, Toojinda T (2007b) Physical  
    mapping  of  Bph3,  a  brown  planthopper  resistance  locus  in  rice.  Maejo  Int  J  Sci  Technol  
    1:166–177 
Jairin J, Teangdeerith S, Leelagud P et al (2010) Detection of a brown planthopper resistance gene  
    bph4 at the same chromosomal position of Bph3 using two different genetic backgrounds of  
    rice. Breed Sci 60:71–75 
James C (2005) Global status of commercialized biotech/GM crops: 2005. ISAAA brief No. 34.  
    International Service for the Acquisition of Agri-Biotech Applications, Ithaca, NY 
Janique S, Sriratanasak W, Ketsuwan K, Jairin J, Jeratthitikul E (2017) Phylogeography of the  
    Asian rice gall midge  Orseolia oryzae (Wood Mason) (Diptera: Cecidomyiidae) in Thailand.  
    Genetica 145:37–49 
Jena KK, Jeung JU, Lee JH, Choi HC, Brar DS (2006) High-resolution mapping of a new brown  
    planthopper (BPH) resistance gene, Bph18(t), and marker-assisted selection for BPH resistance  
    in rice (Oryza sativa L.). Theor Appl Genet 112:288–297 
Jiang H, Hu J, Li Z et al (2018) Evaluation and breeding application of six brown planthopper  
    resistance genes in rice maintainer line Jin 23B. Rice 11:22 
Jin S, Singh ND, Li L, Zhang X, Daniell H (2015) Engineered chloroplast dsRNA silences cyto- 
    chrome p450 monooxygenase, V-ATPase and chitin synthase genes in the insect gut and dis- 
    rupts Helicoverpa armigera larval development and pupation. Plant Biotechnol J 13:435–446 
Jing S, Zhang L, Ma Y et al (2014) Genome-wide mapping of virulence in brown planthopper  
    identifies loci that break down host-plant resistance. PLoS One 9:e98911 
Jing S, Zhao Y, Du B, Chen R, Zhu L, He G (2017) Genomics of interaction between the brown  
    planthopper and rice. Curr Opin Insect Sci 19:82–87 
Kadowaki M, Yoshimura A, Yasui H (2003) RFLP mapping of antibiosis to rice green leafhopper.  
    In: Khush GS, Brar DS, Hardy B (eds) Advances in rice genetics. International Rice Research  
    Institute, Los Baños, pp 270–272 
Katiyar SK, Tan Y, Huang B et al (2001) Molecular mapping of gene Gm-6(t) which confers resis- 
    tance against four biotypes of Asian rice gall midge in China. Theor Appl Genet 103:953–961 
Kawaguchi M, Murata K, Ishii T, Takumi S, Mori N, Nakamura C (2001) Assignment of a brown  
    planthopper (Nilaparvata lugens Stål) resistance gene bph4 to the rice chromosome 6. Breed  
    Sci 51(1):13–18 
Khajuria C, Vélez AM, Rangasamy M et al (2015) Parental RNA interference of genes involved in  
    embryonic development of the western corn rootworm, Diabrotica virgifera virgifera LeConte.  
    Insect Biochem Mol Biol 63:54–62 
Khajuria  C,  Ivashuta  S, Wiggins  E  et  al  (2018)  Development  and  characterization  of  the  first  
    dsRNA-resistant insect population from western corn rootworm, Diabrotica virgifera virgifera  
    LeConte.  PLoS  One  13(5):e0197059.  https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0197059.  http:// 
    www.epa.gov/pesticide- registration/registration- rnai- control- corn- rootworm 
Khanna HK, Raina SK (2002) Elite indica transgenic rice plants expressing modified Cry1Ac endo- 
    toxin of Bacillus thuringiensis show enhanced resistance to yellow stem borer (Scirpophaga  
    incertulas). Transgenic Res 11:411–423 
Kiani  G,  Nematzadeh  G,  Ghareyazie  B  et  al  (2008)  Evaluation  of  Bt  (Bacillus  thuringiensis)  
    rice varieties against stem borer (Chilo suppressalis). Pak J Biol Sci 11:648–651. https://doi. 
    org/10.3923/pjbs.2008.648.651 

----------------------- Page 426-----------------------

416                                                                                   J. S. Bentur et al. 

Kim SM, Sohn JK (2005) Identification of a rice gene (Bph1) conferring resistance to brown plan- 
    thopper (Nilaparvata lugens Stal) using STS markers. Mol Cell 20:30–34 
Kim S, Kim C, Kim WLT et al (2008) Inheritance and field performance of transgenic Korean Bt  
    rice lines resistant to rice yellow stem borer. Euphytica 164:829–839 
Kobayashi T, Yamamoto K, Suetsugu Y et al (2014) Genetic mapping of the rice resistance break- 
    ing gene of the brown planthopper Nilaparvata lugens . Proc R Soc B 281:20140726 
Kola  VSR,  Renuka  P,  Madhav  MS,  Mangrauthia  SK  (2015)  Key  enzymes  and  proteins  of  
    crop  insects  as  candidate  for  RNAi-based  gene  silencing.  Front  Physiol  6:119.  https://doi. 
    org/10.3389/fphys.2015.00119 
Kola VSR, Renuka P, Padmakumari AP et al (2016) Silencing of CYP6 and APN genes affects  
    the growth and development of rice Yellow Stem Borer, Scirpophaga incertulas. Front Physiol  
    7:20. https://doi.org/10.3389/fphys.2016.00020 
Krieg A, Huger AM, Langenbruch GA et al (1983) Bacillus thuringiensis var. tenebrionis: a new  
    pathotype effective against larvae of coleopteran. J Appl Entomol 96:500–508 
Kumar S, Arul L, Talwar D (2010) Generation of marker-free Bt transgenic indica rice and evalu- 
    ation of its yellow stem borer resistance. J Appl Genet 51:243–257. https://doi.org/10.1007/ 
    bf03208854 
Kumar K, Sarao PS, Bhatia D et al (2018) High-resolution genetic mapping of a novel brown  
    planthopper resistance locus, Bph34 in  Oryza sativa L. X  Oryza nivara (Sharma & Shastry)  
    derived  interspecific  F2  population.  Theor  Apppl  Genet  131:1163.  https://doi.org/10.1007/ 
    s00122- 018- 3069- 7 
Lang TN, Buu CB (2003) Genetic and physical maps of gene Bph10 controlling brown planthop- 
    per resistance in rice (Oryza sativa L.). Omonrice 11:35–41 
Lee M, Aguda R, Cohen M et al (1997) Determination of binding of Bacillus thuringiensis (delta)- 
    endotoxin receptors to rice stem borer midguts. Appl Environ Microbiol 63:1453–1459 
Leelagud P, Kongsila S, Vejchasarn P et al (2020) Genetic diversity of Asian rice gall midge based  
    on mtCOI gene sequences and identification of a novel resistance locus gm12 in rice cultivar  
    MN62M. Mol Biol Rep 47:4273. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11033- 020- 05546- 9 
Li  G,  Xu  X,  Xing  H,  Zhu  H,  Fan  Q  (2005)  Insects  resistance  to  Nilaparvata  lugens  and  
    Cnephalocrosis medinalis in transgenic indica rice and the inheritance of gna+ sbti transgenes.  
    Pest Manag Sci 61:390–396 
Li H, Guan R, Guo H, Miao X (2015) New insights into an RNAi approach for plant defence  
    against  piercing-sucking  and  stem-borer  insect  pests.  Plant  Cell  Environ  38:2277–2285.  
    https://doi.org/10.1111/pce.12546 
Ling Y, Weillin Z (2016) Genetic and biochemical mechanisms of rice resistance to planthopper.  
    Plant Cell Rep 35:1559–1572 
Liu G, Yan H, Fu Q et al (2001) Mapping of a new gene for brown planthopper resistance in culti- 
    vated rice introgressed from Oryza eichingeri. Chin Sci Bull 46:1459–1462 
Liu Y, Wu H, Chen H et al (2015) A gene cluster encoding lectin receptor kinases confers broad-  
    spectrum and durable insect resistance in rice. Nat Biotechnol 33:301–305 
Liu Y, Chen L, Liu Y et al (2016) Marker-assisted pyramiding of two brown planthopper resistance  
    genes, Bph3 and Bph27 (t), into elite rice cultivars. Rice 9:27 
Liu Y, Wang Y, Shu C et al (2018)  Cry64Ba and  Cry64Ca, two ETX/MTX2 Bacillus thuringien- 
    sis insecticidal proteins against hemipteran pests. Appl Environ Microbiol 84:e01996–e01917.  
    https://doi.org/10.1128/AEM.01996- 17 
Mahmood-ur-Rahman RH, Shahid AA, Bashir K, Husnain T, Riazuddin S (2007) Insect resistance  
    and  risk  assessment  studies  of  advanced  generations  of  basmati  rice  expressing  two  genes  
    of  Bacillus  thuringiensis.  Electron  J  Biotechnol  10(2):15.  http://www.ejbiotechnology.info/ 
    content/vol10/issue2/full/3/ 
Maiti MK, Nayak P, Basu A et al (2001) Performance of Bt IR64 rice plants resistant against yel- 
    low stem borer in their advanced generations. Food security and environment protection in the  
    new millennium. In: Proceedings Asian Agriculture Congress. IRRI, Los Baños, p 314 

----------------------- Page 427-----------------------

Molecular Approaches for Insect Pest Management in Rice                                                417 

Makkar  GS,  Bentur  JS  (2017)  Breeding  for  stem  borer  and  gall  midge  resistance  in  rice.  In:  
    Arora R, Sandhu S (eds) Breeding insect resistant crops for sustainable agriculture. Springer,  
    Singapore, pp 323–352 
Mao YB, Cai WJ, Wang JW et al (2007) Silencing a cotton bollworm P450 monooxygenase gene  
    by plant-mediated RNAi impairs larval tolerance of gossypol. Nat Biotechnol 25:1307–1313 
Maqbool SB, Husnain T, Riazuddin S et al (1998) Effective control of yellow stem borer and rice  
    leaf folder in transgenic rice indica varieties Basmati 370 and M7 using the novel endotoxin  
    cryIIA Bacillus thuringiensis gene. Mol Breed 6:1–7 
Maqbool SB, Riazuddin S, Loc NT et al (2001) Expression of multiple insecticidal genes confers  
    broad resistance against a range of different rice pests. Mol Breed 7:85–93 
Miao YT, Deng Y, Jia HK, Liu YD, Hou ML (2018) Proteomic analysis of watery saliva secreted  
    by   white-backed   planthopper,   Sogatella   furcifera.   PLoS   One   13:e0193831.  https://doi. 
    org/10.1371/journal.pone.0193831 
Moghaieb R (2010) Transgenic rice plants expressing  cry1Ia5 gene are resistant to stem borer  
    (Chilo agamemnon). GM Crops 1:288–293. https://doi.org/10.4161/gmcr.1.5.14276 
Murai  H,  Hashimoto  Z,  Sharma  PN,  Shimizu  T,  Murata  K,  Takumi  S,  Mori  N,  Kawasaki  S,  
    Nakamura C (2001) Construction of a high-resolution linkage map of a rice brown planthopper  
    (Nilaparvata lugens Stål) resistance gene bph2. Theor Appl Genet 103(4):526–532 
Myint KKM, Fujita D, Matsumura M, Sonoda T, Yoshimura A, Yasui H (2012) Mapping and pyra- 
    miding of two major genes for resistance to the brown planthopper (Nilaparvata lugens [Stål])  
    in the rice cultivar ADR52. Theor Appl Genet 124:495–504 
Nagadhara D, Ramesh S, Pasalu IC, Rao YK, Krishnaiah NV, Sarma NP et al (2003) Transgenic  
    indica rice-resistant to sap sucking insects. Plant Biotechnol J 1:231–240 
Nagadhara D, Ramesh S, Pasalu IC, Rao YK, Sarma NP, Reddy VD, Rao KV (2004) Transgenic  
    rice plants expressing the snowdrop lectin gene (gna) exhibit high-level resistance to the white-  
    backed planthopper (Sogatella furcifera). Theor Appl Genet 109:1399–1405 
Naik  BS,  Divya  D,  Sahu  N  et  al  (2018) A  new  gene  Bph33(t)  conferring  resistance  to  brown  
    planthopper (BPH), Nilaparvata lugens (Stal) in rice line RP2068-18-3-5. Euphytica 214:53 
Nair S, Bentur JS, Sama VSAK (2011) Mapping gall midge resistance genes: towards durable  
    resistance through gene pyramiding. In: Muralidharan K, Siddiq EA (eds) Genomics and crop  
    improvement:  relevance  and  reservations.  Institute  of  Biotechnology,  ANGR  Agricultural  
    University, Hyderabad, pp 256–264 
Nayak  P,  Basu  D,  Das  S  et  al  (1997)  Transgenic  elite  indica  rice  plants  expressing  CryIAc-  
    endotoxin of Bacillus thuringiensis are resistant against yellow stem borer (Scirpophaga incer- 
    tulas). Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 94:2111–2116 
Ojha A, Sinha DK, Padmakumari AP, Bentur JS, Nair S (2017) Bacterial community structure in  
    the Asian rice gall midge reveals a varied microbiome rich in Proteobacteria. Sci Rep 7:9424.  
    https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598- 017- 09791- 0 
Painter RH (1951) Insect resistance in crop plants. University of Kansas Press, Lawrence, KS 
Pan PL, Ye YX, Lou YH et al (2018) A comprehensive omics analysis and functional survey of  
    cuticular proteins in the brown planthopper. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 115:5175. https://doi. 
    org/10.1073/pnas.1716951115 
Peng L, Zhao Y, Wang H et al (2017) Functional study of cytochrome P450 enzymes from the  
    brown planthopper (Nilaparvata lugens Stål) to analyze its adaptation to BPH-resistant rice.  
    Front Physiol 8:972 
Pradhan S, Chakraborty A, Sikdar N et al (2016) Marker-free transgenic rice expressing the veg- 
    etative insecticidal protein (Vip) of Bacillus thuringiensis shows broad insecticidal properties.  
    Planta 244:789–804 
Prahalada GD, Shivakumar N, Lohithaswa HC et al (2017) Identification and fine mapping of a  
    new gene, BPH31 conferring resistance to brown planthopper biotype 4 of India to improve  
    rice, Oryza sativa L. Rice 10:41 
Price DR, Gatehouse JA (2008) RNAi-mediated crop protection against insects. Trends Biotechnol  
    26:393–400 

----------------------- Page 428-----------------------

418                                                                                       J. S. Bentur et al. 

Qiu Y, Guo J, Jing S, Zhu L, He G (2010) High-resolution mapping of the brown planthopper  
    resistance gene Bph6 in rice and characterizing its resistance in the 9311 and Nipponbare near  
    isogenic backgrounds. Theor Appl Genet 121:1601–1611 
Qiu Y, Guo J, Jing S, Zhu L, He G (2012) Development and characterization of japonica  rice  
    lines carrying the brown planthopper-resistance genes BPH12 and BPH6. Theor Appl Genet  
    124:485–494 
Quilis J, López-García B, Meynard D et al (2014) Inducible expression of a fusion gene encod- 
    ing two proteinase inhibitors leads to insect and pathogen resistance in transgenic rice. Plant  
    Biotechnol J 12:367–377 
Rahman ML, Jiang W, Chu SH, Qiao Y, Ham TH, Woo MO, Lee J, Khanam MS, Chin JH, Jeung  
    JU, Brar DS (2009) High-resolution mapping of two rice brown planthopper resistance genes,  
    Bph20 (t) and Bph21 (t), originating from Oryza minuta. Theor Appl Genet 119(7):1237–1246 
Raina SK, Khanna HK, Talwar D et al (2003) Insect bioassays of transgenic indica rice carry- 
    ing a synthetic Bt toxin gene,  cry1Ac. In: Advances in rice genetics, Proceedings of the 4th  
    International Rice Research Conference, pp 567–569 
Ramesh S, Nagadhara D, Pasalu IC et al (2004a) Development of stem borer- resistant transgenic  
    parental lines involved in the production of hybrid rice. J Biotechnol 111:131–141 
Ramesh S, Nagadhara D, Reddy VD, Rao KV (2004b) Production of transgenic indica rice- resistant  
    to yellow stem borer and sap-sucking insects, using super-binary vectors of Agrobacterium  
    tumefaciens. Plant Sci 166:1077–1085 
Ramesh K, Padmavathi G, Dean R, Pandey MK, Lakshmi VJ, Bentur JS (2014) White-backed  
    planthopper Sogatella furcifera (Horvath) (Homoptera: Delphacidae) resistance in rice variety  
    Sinna Sivappu. Euphytica 200:139–148 
Rao KV, Rathore KS, Hodges TK et al (1998) Expression of snowdrop lectin (GNA) in transgenic  
    rice plants confers resistance to rice brown planthopper. Plant J 15:469–477 
Rawat N, Sinha DK, Rajendrakumar P et al (2010) Role of pathogenesis-related genes in rice-gall  
    midge interactions. Curr Sci 99(10):1361–1368 
Rawat N, Neeraja CN, Nair S, Bentur JS (2012a) Differential gene expression in gall midge sus- 
    ceptible rice genotypes revealed by suppressive subtraction hybridization (SSH) cDNA librar- 
    ies and microarray analysis. Rice 5:8 
Rawat N, Neeraja CN, Sundaram RM, Nair S, Bentur JS (2012b) A novel mechanism of gall midge  
    resistance  in  the  rice  variety  Kavya  revealed  by  microarray  analysis.  Funct  Integr  Genom  
    12:249–264 
Rawat N, Himabindu K, Neeraja CN, Nair S, Bentur JS (2013) Suppressive subtraction hybrid- 
    ization reveals that rice gall midge attack elicits plant-pathogen like responses in rice. Plant  
    Physiol Biochem 63:122–130 
Ren  J,  Gao  F,  Wu  X  et  al  (2016)  Bph32,  a  novel  gene  encoding  an  unknown  SCR  domain-  
    containing protein, confers resistance against the brown planthopper in rice. Sci Rep 6:37645 
Renganayaki K, Fritz AK, Sadasivam S et al (2002) Mapping and progress toward map-based  
    cloning of brown planthopper biotype-4 resistance gene introgressed from  Oryza officinalis  
    into cultivated rice, O. sativa. Crop Sci 42:2112–2117 
Renuka  P,  Maganti  SM,  Padmakumari  AP  et  al  (2017)  RNA-Seq  of  rice  yellow  stem  borer,  
    Scirpophaga incertulas reveals molecular insights during four larval developmental stages. G3  
    (Bethesda) 7:3031. https://doi.org/10.1534/g3.117.043737 
Riaz  N,  Husnain T,  Fatima T  et  al  (2006)  Development  of  indica  Basmati  rice  harboring  two  
    insecticidal  genes  for  sustainable  resistance  against  lepidopteran  insects.  South  Afr  J  Bot  
    72:217–223 
Saha P, Majumder P, Dutta I, Ray T, Roy SC, Das S (2006) Transgenic rice expressing Allium  
    sativum   leaf   lectin   with   enhanced   resistance   against   sap-sucking   insect   pests.   Planta  
    223:1329–1343. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00425- 005- 0182- z 
Saka N, Tsuji T, Toyama T, Yano M, Izawa T, Sasaki T (2006) Development of cleaved ampli- 
    fied polymorphic sequence (CAPS) markers linked to a green rice leafhopper resistance gene,  
    Grh3(t). Plant Breed 125:140–143 

----------------------- Page 429-----------------------

Molecular Approaches for Insect Pest Management in Rice                                                 419 

Sama VSAK, Himabindu K, Naik BS, Sundaram RM, Viraktamath BC, Bentur JS (2012) Mapping  
    and  MAS  breeding  of  an  allelic  gene  to  the  Gm8  for  resistance  to Asian  rice  gall  midge.  
    Euphytica 187:393–400 
Sama VSAK, Rawat N, Sundaram RM et al (2014) A putative candidate for the recessive gall  
    midge resistance gene gm3 in rice identified and validated. Theor Appl Genet 127:113–124 
Sardesai N, Kumar A, Rajyashri KR, Nair S, Mohan M (2002) Identification and mapping of an  
    AFLP marker linked to Gm7, a gall midge resistance gene and its conversion to a SCAR marker  
    for its utility in marker aided selection in rice. Theor Appl Genet 105:691–698 
Savary S, Willocquet L, Elazegui FA, Castilla NP, Teng PS (2000) Rice pest constraints in tropical  
    Asia: quantification of yield losses due to rice pests in a range of production situations. Plant  
    Dis 84:357–369 
Schuler TH, Poppy GM, Kerry BR et al (1998) Insect-resistant transgenic plants. Trends Biotechnol  
    16:168–175 
Sengupta  S, Chakraborti D,  Mondal  HA, Das S  (2010)  Selectable antibiotic  resistance marker  
    gene-free  transgenic  rice  harbouring  the  garlic  leaf  lectin  gene  exhibits  resistance  to  sap-  
    sucking planthoppers. Plant Cell Rep 29:261–271 
Shangguan X, Zhang J, Liu B et al (2018) A mucin-like protein of planthopper is required for feed- 
    ing and induces immunity response in plants. Plant Physiol 176:552–565 
Shao  E,  Lin  L,  Chen  C  et  al  (2016)  Loop  replacements  with  gut-binding  peptides  in  Cry1Ab  
    domain  II  enhanced  toxicity  against  the  brown  planthopper,  Nilaparvata  lugens  (Stål).  Sci  
    Rep 6:20106 
Shu Q, Ye G, Cui H et al (2000) Transgenic rice plants with a synthetic Cry1Ab gene from Bacillus  
    thuringiensis were highly resistant to eight lepidopteran rice pest species. Mol Breed 6:433–439 
Shu  QY,  Cui  HR,  Ye  GY  et  al  (2002)  Agronomic  and  morphological  characterization  of  
    Agrobacterium -transformed  Bt  rice  plants.  Euphytica  127:345–352.  https://doi.org/10.102 
    3/a:1020358617257 
Sinha DK, Bentur JS, Nair S (2011a) Compatible interaction with its rice host leads to enhanced  
    expression  of  gamma  subunit  of  oligosaccharyl  transferase  (OoOST)  in  the Asian  rice  gall  
    midge (Orseolia oryzae). Insect Mol Biol 20(5):567–575 
Sinha DK, Lakshmi M, Anuradha G et al (2011b) Serine proteases-like genes in the rice gall midge  
    show differential expression in compatible and incompatible interactions with rice. Int J Mol  
    Sci 12:2842–2852 
Sinha  DK,  Atray  I,  Bentur  JS,  Nair  S  (2012a)  Expression  of  nucleoside  diphosphate  kinase  
    (OoNDPK) is enhanced in rice gall midge feeding on susceptible rice hosts and its overexpres- 
    sion leads to salt tolerance in E. coli. Insect Mol Biol 21(6):593–603 
Sinha  DK,  Nagaraju  J,  Tomar A,  Bentur  JS,  Nair  S  (2012b)  Pyrosequencing-based  transcrip- 
    tome analysis of the Asian rice gall midge reveals differential response during compatible and  
    incompatible interaction. Int J Mol Sci 13:13079–13103 
Sinha D, Atray I, Bentur JS, Nair S (2015) Feeding on resistant rice leads to enhanced expression  
    of defender against apoptotic cell death (OoDAD1) in the Asian rice gall midge. BMC Plant  
    Biol 15:235 
Sinha DK, Atray I, Agarrwal R, Bentur JS, Nair S (2017) Genomics of the Asian rice gall midge  
    and its interactions with rice. Curr Opin Insect Sci 19:76–81 
Slamet LIH, Novalina S, Damayanti D et al (2003) Inheritance of cry1Ab and snowdrop lectin gna  
    genes in transgenic javanica rice progenies and bioassay for resistance to brown planthopper  
    and yellow stem borer. International Rice Research Institute (IRRI), Los Baños, pp 565–566 
Srinivasan  TS,  Almazan  MLP,  Bernal  CC,  Ramal  AF,  Subbarayalu  MK,  Horgan  FG  (2016)  
    Interactions  between  nymphs  of  Nilaparvata  lugens  and  Sogatella  furcifera  (Hemiptera:  
    Delphacidae) on resistant and susceptible rice varieties. Appl Entomol Zool 51:81–90 
Su C-C, Zhai H-Q, Wang C-MG, Sun LH, Wan J-M (2006) SSR mapping of brown planthop- 
    per resistance gene  Bph9 in Kaharamana, an indica rice (Oryza sativa L.). Acta Genet Sin  
    33:262–268 

----------------------- Page 430-----------------------

420                                                                                       J. S. Bentur et al. 

Suh JP, Yang SJ, Jeung JU et al (2011) Development of elite breeding lines conferring Bph18 gene-  
    derived resistance to brown planthopper (BPH) by marker-assisted selection and genome-wide  
    background analysis in japonica rice (Oryza sativa L.). Field Crop Res 120:215–222 
Sun L, Su C, Wang C, Zhai H, Wan J (2005) Mapping of a major resistance gene to the brown  
    planthopper in the rice cultivar Rathu Heenati. Breed Sci 55:391–396 
Sun L-H, Wang C-M, Su C-C, Liu Y-Q, Zhai H-Q, Wan J-M (2006) Mapping and marker-assisted  
    selection of a brown planthopper resistance gene bph2 in rice (Oryza sativa L.). Acta Genet  
    Sin 33:717–723 
Sundaram RM (2007) Fine-mapping of rice-gall midge resistance genes Gm1 and Gm2 and valida- 
    tion of the linked markers. Dissertation. University of Hyderabad, Hyderabad 
Sundaram RM, Balachandran SM, Madhav MS, Viraktamath BC (2013) Biotechnological options  
    for rice improvement. In: Shetty PK, Hegde MR, Mahadevappa M (eds) Innovation in rice  
    production. National Institute of Advanced Studies, Bangalore, pp 167–202 
Tamura K, Fukuta Y, Hirae M, Oya S, Ashikawa I, Yagi T (1999) Mapping of the Grh1 locus for  
    green rice leafhopper resistance in rice using RFLP markers. Breed Sci 49:11–14 
Tamura K, Fukuta Y, Hirae M, Oya S, Ashikawa I, Yagi T (2004) RFLP mapping of a new resis- 
    tance gene for green rice leafhopper in Kanto PL10. Rice Genet Newsl 21:62–64 
Tamura Y, Hattori M, Yoshioka H et al (2014) Map-based cloning and characterization of a brown  
    planthopper  resistance  gene  BPH26  from  Oryza  sativa  L.  ssp.  indica  cultivar ADR52.  Sci  
    Rep 4:5872 
Tan GX, Wang QM, Ren X, Huang Z, Zhu LL, He GC (2004) Two white-backed planthopper resis- 
    tance genes in rice share the same loci with those for brown planthopper resistance. Heredity  
    92:212–217 
Tang  W,  Lin YJ  (2007)  Field  experiment  of  transgenic  cry1Ab  insect  resistant  rice.  Hereditas  
    29:1008–1012 
Terenius O, Papanicolaou A, Garbutt JS et al (2011) RNA interference in Lepidoptera: an over- 
    view of successful and unsuccessful studies and implications for experimental design. J Insect  
    Physiol 57:231–245 
Thaler  JS,  Humphrey  PT,  Whiteman  NK  (2012)  Evolution  of  jasmonate  and  salicylate  signal  
    crosstalk. Trends Plant Sci 17:260–270 
Tomoyasu Y, Denell RE (2004) Larval RNAi in Tribolium (Coleoptera) for analyzing adult devel- 
    opment. Dev Genes Evol 214:575–578. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00427- 004- 0434- 0 
Tu J, Zhang G, Datta K et al (2000) Field performance of transgenic elite commercial hybrid rice  
    expressing Bacillus thuringiensis delta-endotoxin. Nat Biotechnol 18:1101–1104 
Turner CT, Davy MW, MacDiarmid RM, Plummer KM, Birch NP, Newcomb RD (2006) RNA  
    interference in the light brown apple moth, Epiphyas postvittana (Walker) induced by double-  
    stranded RNA feeding. Insect Mol Biol 15:383–391 
Venkanna V, Hari Y, Rukminidevi K et al (2018) Marker-assisted selection for pyramiding of gall  
    midge resistance genes in Kavya, a popular rice variety. Int J Curr Microbiol App Sci 7:745–753 
Vijayalakshmi  P, Amudhan  S,  Himabindu  K,  Cheralu  C,  Bentur  JS  (2006) A  new  biotype  of  
    the Asian rice gall midge  Orseolia oryzae (Diptera: Cecidomyiidae) characterized from the  
    Warangal population in Andhra Pradesh. India Int J Trop Insect Sci 26:207–211 
Vila L, Quilis J, Meynard D et al (2005) Expression of the maize proteinase inhibitor (mpi) gene  
    in rice plants enhances resistance against the striped stem borer (Chilo suppressalis): effects on  
    larval growth and insect gut proteinases. Plant Biotechnol J 3:187–202 
Wang Y, Wang X, Yuan H et al (2008) Responses of two contrasting genotypes of rice to brown  
    planthopper. Mol Plant-Microbe Interact 21:122–132 
Wang Y, Zhang L, Li Y et al (2014) Expression of Cry1Ab protein in a marker-free transgenic  
    Bt  rice  line  and  its  efficacy  in  controlling  a  target  pest,  Chilo  suppressalis  (Lepidoptera:  
    Crambidae). Environ Entomol 43:528–536 
Wang Y, Cao L, Zhang Y et al (2015) Map-based cloning and characterization of BPH29, a B3  
    domain-containing recessive gene conferring brown planthopper resistance in rice. J Exp Bot  
    66:6035–6045 

----------------------- Page 431-----------------------

Molecular Approaches for Insect Pest Management in Rice                                              421 

Wang H, Ye S, Mou T (2016a) Molecular breeding of rice restorer lines and hybrids for brown  
    planthopper (BPH) resistance using the Bph14 and Bph15 genes. Rice 9:53 
Wang J, Zhang H, Wang H et al (2016b) Functional validation of cadherin as a receptor of Bt toxin  
    Cry1Ac in Helicoverpa armigera utilizing the CRISPR/Cas9 system. Insect Biochem Mol Biol  
    76:11–17. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ibmb.2016.06.008 
Wang L, Tang N, Gao X et al (2017a) Genome sequence of a rice pest, the white-backed planthop- 
    per (Sogatella furcifera). Giga Sci 6:1–9 
Wang Y, Jiang W, Liu H et al (2017b) Marker-assisted pyramiding of Bph6 and Bph9 into elite  
    restorer line 93–11 and development of functional marker for Bph9. Rice 10:51 
Wang W, Wan P, Lai F, Zhu T, Fu Q (2018) Double-stranded RNA targeting calmodulin reveals  
    a potential target for pest management of Nilaparvata lugens . Pest Manag Sci 74:1711–1719.  
    https://doi.org/10.1002/ps.4865 
Waris MI, Younas A, ul Qamar MT et al (2018) Silencing of chemosensory protein gene NlugCSP8  
    by RNAi induces declining behavioral responses of Nilaparvata lugens . Front Physiol 9:379.  
    https://doi.org/10.3389/fphys.2018.00379 
Wu C, Fan Y, Zhang C et al (1997a) Transgenic fertile japonica rice plants expressing a modified  
    cry1Ab gene resistant to yellow stem borer. Plant Cell Rep 17:129–132 
Wu C, Zhao R, Fan Y et al (1997b) Transgenic rice plants resistant to yellow stem borer. Rice  
    Biotechnol 9:7 
Wu J, Maehara T, Shimokawa T et al (2002) A comprehensive rice-transcript map containing 6591  
    expressed sequence tag sites. Plant Cell Online 14:525–535 
Wu H, Liu Y, He J et al (2014) Fine-mapping of brown planthopper (Nilaparvata lugens Stål)  
    resistance gene Bph28 (t) in rice (Oryza sativa L.). Mol Breed 33:909–918 
Wunn J, Kloti A, Burkhardt P et al (1996) Transgenic indica rice breeding line IR58 expressing a  
    synthetic crylA(b) gene from Bacillus thuringiensis provides effective insect pest control. Nat  
    Biotechnol 14:171–176 
Xue  J,  Zhou  X,  Zhang  CX  et  al  (2014)  Genomes  of  the  rice  pest  brown  planthopper  and  its  
    endosymbionts  reveal  complex  complementary  contributions  for  host  adaptation.  Genome  
    Biol 15:521 
Xue WH,  Xu  N, Yuan  XB  et  al  (2018)  CRISPR/Cas9-mediated  knockout  of  two  eye  pigmen- 
    tation genes in the brown planthopper, Nilaparvata lugens (Hemiptera: Delphacidae). Insect  
    Biochem Mol Biol 93:19–26 
Yamasaki M, Yoshimura A, Yasui H (2003) Genetic basis of ovicidal response to white-backed  
    planthopper (Sogatella furcifera Horvath) in rice (Oryza sativa L.). Mol Breed 12:133–143 
Yang H, You A, Yang Z et al (2004) High-resolution genetic mapping at the Bph15 locus for brown  
    planthopper resistance in rice (Oryza sativa L.). Theor Appl Genet 110:182–191 
Yang Z, Chen H, Tang W et al (2011) Development and characterization of transgenic rice express- 
    ing two Bacillus thuringiensis genes. Pest Manag Sci 67:414–422 
Yang L, Li RB, Li YR et al (2012) Genetic mapping of  bph20 (t) and  bph21(t) loci conferring  
    brown planthopper resistance to Nilaparvata lugens Stål in rice (Oryza sativa L.). Euphytica  
    183:161–171 
Yang Y, Mei F, Zhang W et al (2014) Creation of Bt rice expressing a fusion protein of cry1Ac and  
    Cry1I-like using a green tissue-specific promoter. J Econ Entomol 107:1674–1679 
Yarasi B, Sadumpati V, Pasalu IC, Reddy DV, Rao KV (2008) Transgenic rice expressing Allium  
    sativum leaf agglutinin (ASAL) exhibits high-level resistance against major sap-sucking pests.  
    BMC Plant Biol 8:102. https://doi.org/10.1186/1471- 2229- 8- 102 
Ye G, Shu Q, Cui H et al (2000) A leaf-section bioassay for evaluating rice stem borer resistance  
    in transgenic rice containing a synthetic cry1Ab gene from Bacillus thuringiensis Berliner. Bull  
    Entomol Res 90:179–182. https://doi.org/10.1017/s0007485300000298 
Ye G, Shu Q, Yao H et al (2001) Field evaluation of resistance of transgenic rice containing a syn- 
    thetic cry1Ab gene from Bacillus thuringiensis Berliner to two stem borers. J Econ Entomol  
    94:271–276 

----------------------- Page 432-----------------------

422                                                                                    J. S. Bentur et al. 

Ye R, Huang H, Yang Z et al (2009) Development of insect-resistant transgenic rice with Cry1C-  
    free endosperm. Pest Manag Sci 65:1015–1020 
Ye  W, Yu  H,  Jian Y  et  al  (2017a) A  salivary  EF-hand  calcium-binding  protein  of  the  brown  
    planthopper  Nilaparvata  lugens  functions  as  an  effector  for  defense  responses  in  rice.  Sci  
    Rep 7:40498 
Ye ZF, Liu XL, Han Q et al (2017b) Functional characterization of PBP1 gene in Helicoverpa  
    armigera (Lepidoptera: Noctuidae) by using the CRISPR/Cas9 system. Sci Rep 7:8470. https:// 
    doi.org/10.1038/s41598- 017- 08769- 2 
Yin K, Gao C, Qiu JL (2017) Progress and prospects in plant genome editing. Nat Plants 3:17107 
Yoshimura  S,  Komatsu  M,  Kaku  K  et  al  (2012)  Production  of  transgenic  rice  plants  express- 
    ing  Dioscorea  batatas  tuber  lectin1  to  confer  resistance  against  brown  planthopper.  Plant  
    Biotechnol 29:501–504 
Yu R, Xu X, Liang Y et al (2014) The insect ecdysone receptor is a good potential target for RNAi-  
    based pest control. Int J Biol Sci 10:1171–1180. https://doi.org/10.7150/ijbs.9598 
Zamore PD, Tuschl T, Shorp PA, Bartel DP (2000) RNAi: double-stranded RNA directs the ATP-  
    dependent cleavage of mRNA at 21 to 23 nucleotide intervals. Cell 101:25–33 
Zeng Q, Wu Q, Zhou K et al (2002) Obtaining stem borer-resistant homozygous transgenic lines  
    of Minghui 81 harboring novel  cry1Ac gene via particle bombardment. Yi Chuan Xue Bao  
    29:519–524 
Zeng  F,  Liu  H,  Zhang  A  et  al  (2018)  Three  chemosensory  proteins  from  the  rice  leaffolder  
    Cnaphalocrocis medinalis involved in host volatile and sex pheromone reception. Insect Mol  
    Biol 27:710. https://doi.org/10.1111/imb.12503 
Zha W, Peng X, Chen R, Du B, Zhu L, He G (2011) Knockdown of midgut genes by dsRNA-  
    transgenic  plant-mediated  RNA  interference  in  the  Hemipteran  insect  Nilaparvata  lugens .  
    PLoS One 6:e20504 
Zhang Y, Li Y, Zhang Y et al (2011) Seasonal expression of Bt proteins in transgenic rice lines  
    and  the  resistance  against Asiatic  rice  borer  Chilo  suppressalis  (Walker).  Environ  Entomol  
    40:1323–1330 
Zhang  KJ,  Zhu  WC,  Rong  X  et  al  (2013)  The  complete  mitochondrial  genomes  of  two  rice  
    planthoppers,  Nilaparvata lugens and  Laodelphax striatellus : conserved genome rearrange- 
    ment  in  Delphacidae  and  discovery  of  new  characteristics  of  atp8  and  tRNA  genes.  BMC  
    Genomics 14:417 
Zhang  KJ,  Zhu  WC,  Rong  X  et  al  (2014)  The  complete  mitochondrial  genome  sequence  of  
    Sogatella furcifera (Horváth) and a comparative mitogenomic analysis of three predominant  
    rice planthoppers. Gene 533:100–109 
Zhang J, Khan SA, Hasse C, Ruf S, Heckel DG, Bock R (2015) Full crop protection from an insect  
    pest by expression of long double-stranded RNAs in plastids. Science 347:991–994 
Zhang L, Qiu LY, Yang HL et al (2017) Study on the effect of wing bud chitin metabolism and its  
    developmental network genes in the brown planthopper, Nilaparvata lugens, by knockdown of  
    TRE gene. Front Physiol 8:750 
Zhao  Q  (2015)  Generation  of  insect-resistant  and  glyphosate-tolerant  rice  by  introduction  of  
    a T-DNA containing two Bt insecticidal genes and an  EPSPS gene. J Zhejiang Univ Sci B  
    16(10):824–831 
Zhao L, Yang M, Shen Q et al (2016a) Functional characterization of three trehalase genes regulat- 
    ing the chitin metabolism pathway in rice brown planthopper using RNA interference. Sci Rep  
    6:27841. https://doi.org/10.1038/srep27841 
Zhao Y, Huanga J, Wanga Z et al (2016b) Allelic diversity in an NLR gene BPH9 enables rice to  
    combat planthopper variation. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 113:45 
Zhou WW, Liang QM, Xu Y et al (2013) Genomic insights into the Glutathione S-transferase  
    gene  family  of  two  rice  planthoppers,  Nilaparvata  lugens  (Stål)  and  Sogatella  furcifera  
    (Horváth) (Hemiptera: Delphacidae). PLoS One 8(2):e56604. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal. 
    pone.0056604 

----------------------- Page 433-----------------------

Molecular Approaches for Insect Pest Management in Rice                                         423 

Zhu GH, Peng YC, Zheng MY et al (2017a) CRISPR/Cas9-mediated BLOS2 knockout resulting in  
    disappearance of yellow strips and white spots on the larval integument in Spodoptera litura.  
    J Insect Physiol 103:29–35 
Zhu J, Hao P, Lu C, Ma Y, Feng Y, Yu X (2017b) Expression and RNA interference of ribosomal  
    protein L5 gene in Nilaparvata lugens (Hemiptera: Delphacidae). J Insect Sci 17:73. https:// 
    doi.org/10.1093/jisesa/iex047 
Zhu J, Jiang F, Wang X et al (2017c) Genome sequence of the small brown planthopper, Laodelphax  
    striatellus. Giga Sci 6:1–12 
Zimmer CT, Garrood WT, Singh SK et al (2018) Neofunctionalization of duplicated P450 genes  
    drives the evolution of insecticide resistance in the brown planthopper. Curr Biol 28:268–274 
Zuo Y, Wang H, Xu Y et al (2017) CRISPR/Cas9-mediated G4946E substitution in the ryanodine  
    receptor of Spodoptera exigua confers high levels of resistance to diamide insecticides. Insect  
    Biochem Mol Biol 89:79–85 

Open Access    This chapter is licensed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution 4.0  
International License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/), which permits use, sharing,  
adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give appropriate  
credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons license and  
indicate if changes were made. 
    The images or other third party material in this chapter are included in the chapter's Creative  
Commons license, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not  
included in the chapter's Creative Commons license and your intended use is not permitted by  
statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from  
the copyright holder. 

----------------------- Page 434-----------------------

Doubled Haploids in Rice Improvement:  
Approaches, Applications, and Future  
Prospects 

Sanghamitra Samantaray, Jauhar Ali, Katrina L. C. Nicolas,  
Jawahar Lal Katara, Ram Lakhan Verma, C. Parameswaran, B. N. Devanna,  
Awadhesh Kumar, Byomkesh Dash, and Sudhansu Sekhar Bhuyan 

Abstract  Exploitation of biotechnological tools in conventional breeding strate- 
gies is the need of the hour for overcoming limitations in rice production and pro- 
ductivity. In addition, improvement in quantity and quality along with resistance to  
climatic and disease stress in rice require immediate attention. Anther culture has  
proven its efficiency by instantaneously fixing homozygosity through diploidization  
of regenerated haploid plants. Therefore, androgenesis provides an efficient plat- 
form for developing inbred lines in a short period of time. Although anther culture  
shows its efficiency in speeding up breeding in several crop species, including rice,  
associated  limitations  still  prevent  the  exploitation  of  its  optimum  potential.  
Although anther culture is well exploited in japonica  rice breeding, its application  
in  indica rice is limited because of inherent recalcitrant genetic backgrounds. The  
success of anther culture is determined by several factors that limit the efficiency of  
androgenesis. Identified constraints are early anther necrosis, poor-callus response,  
and proliferation, and low green-plant regeneration, along with the most frustrating  
albinism associated with  indica rice, which has been considerably clarified. This  
chapter details the method of androgenesis and scope for improving the applicability  
of  anther  culture  producing  doubled  haploids  of  rice  in  order  to  use  it  as  a  
complementary tool for precision breeding. 

Keywords  Androgenesis · Doubled haploid · Callus · Regeneration ·  
Anther culture 

S. Samantaray (*) · J. L. Katara · R. L. Verma · C. Parameswaran · B. N. Devanna  
A. Kumar · B. Dash · S. S. Bhuyan  
ICAR-National Rice Research Institute, Cuttack, Odisha, India  

J. Ali · K. L. C. Nicolas  
IRRI, Metro Manila, Philippines 

© The Author(s) 2021                                                                          425 
J. Ali, S. H. Wani (eds.), Rice Improvement,  
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-66530-2_12 

----------------------- Page 435-----------------------

426                                                                       S. Samantaray et al. 

 1    Introduction 

Doubled-haploid breeding through anther culture has emerged as an exciting and  
powerful  tool,  and  a  convenient  alternative  to  conventional  techniques  for  crop  
improvement  (Purwoko  et  al.  2010).  Doubled  haploids  have  several  advantages,  
such  as  shortening  the  breeding  cycle  by  immediate  fixation  of  homozygosity,  
offering   high-selection   efficiency,   widening   genetic   variability   through   the  
production  of  gametoclonal  variants,  and  expressing  desirable  recessive  genes  
suitable for breeding (Devaux and Pickering 2005). Despite all the advantages DH  
technology offers in several crops, it has not been put to use in rice to sufficient  
extent  in  order  to  take  maximum  advantage,  even  though  more  than  half  of  the  
world’s  population  depends  on  rice  for  consumption  as  staple  food.  Further,  the  
development of high-yielding rice cultivars is urgently needed to meet the demand  
of the increasing population and the challenges of a changing climate since cultivar  
development is a lengthy and time-consuming process. However, anther culture has  
been exploited to develop several varieties and improved breeding lines, mostly in  
japonica   cultivars  (Grewal  et  al.  2011).  Contrastingly,  this  technique  has  poor  
implications in indica rice cultivars owing to poor-androgenic response. In addition,  
early anther necrosis, poor-callus proliferation, and albino-plant regeneration are  
some of the major problems encountered in the case of indica rice at the time of  
androgenesis, which needs vast improvement. Hence, attempts are being made to  
overcome  low-anther  culturability  by  evaluating  several  key  factors  involved  in  
affecting the success of anther culture (Trejo-Tapia et al. 2002; Jacquard et al. 2006).  
DH technology integrated with phenomics and genomics could accelerate cultivar  
development and economize plant-breeding operations. 
    Several approaches in the production of DHs were developed, for which in vitro  
culture was found to be the most efficient and simplest technique. It is being used to  
produce  haploids/doubled  haploids  in  several  crops.  The  two  commonly  used  
in vitro methods for DH production are gynogenesis and androgenesis. However,  
androgenesis shows its effectiveness and applicability in producing haploids and  
DHs in numerous cereals (Forster et al. 2007). To alleviate the problems associated  
with  indica  rice  DH  breeding,  manipulation  of  the  limiting  factors  related  to  
androgenesis is required to achieve a successful protocol for effective exploitation. 
    This chapter deals with insights into the practical aspects of anther culture tech- 
nique for it to be fully exploited for improving rice breeding. 

2     Status of Doubled-Haploid Research in the Success  
     of Indica Rice Anther Culture 

The past and current status of research highlights the usefulness of DH technology  
in  rice  improvement.  The  discovery  of  haploids  in  plants  led  to  the  use  of  DH  
technology  in  plant  breeding. Although  there  are  different  methods  to  generate  

----------------------- Page 436-----------------------

Doubled Haploids in Rice Improvement: Approaches, Applications, and Future Prospects   427 

haploids,  they  are  usually  accompanied  by  chromosome  doubling.  In  general,  
in vitro methods were found to be the most pertinent in developing haploids and  
DHs, for which androgenesis shows its effectiveness and applicability in numerous  
cereals, including rice. These systems allow completely homozygous lines to be  
developed from heterozygous parents in a single generation. 
   The first naturally occurring haploids were reported by Blakeslee et al. ( 1922) in  
jimson   weed   (Datura   stramonium   L.)   and   thereafter   natural   haploids   were  
documented  in  several  other  species.  However,  the  relevance  of  DHs  came  into  
prominence only when Guha and Maheshwari ( 1964, 1966) reported a breakthrough  
in the production of haploids from anther culture of Datura innoxia (Mill.). Further,  
their research revolutionized the use of DH technology in plant breeding worldwide.  
Subsequently, this haploid discovery by anther culture provided several opportunities  
for applying this technique in crop improvement programs. In rice, the first report  
on producing haploids through anther culture came from Niizeki and Oono (1968).  
Subsequently, the doubled-haploidy approach coupled with conventional breeding  
led to the development of several rice varieties for pest and disease resistance, high  
yield, and good-quality grains in many countries. Furthermore, anther culture could  
facilitate other biotechnological approaches such as gene transformation technology  
and the identification of QTLs. 
   Despite all the advantages DH technology offers, it has not been put to use in  
indica rice to a great extent for maximizing its advantage. This is mostly because of  
the lack in expertise and the variable response of different genotypes under in vitro  
culture. Although  the  androgenic  response  to japonica -subspecies  has  led  to  the  
release of many varieties, the potential of anther culture for indica rice breeding is  
not fully exploited, in spite of the release of a salt-tolerant  indica variety through  
anther culture (Senadhira et al. 2002). Early anther necrosis, poor-callus proliferation,  
and albino-plant regeneration are some of the problems encountered in indica rice  
at the time of androgenesis, which are researchable concerns. Several determining  
factors  associated  with  poor-androgenic  response  were  also  addressed  to  obtain  
success    in  rice  anther   culture.   Although    one-step    androgenesis    (somatic  
embryogenesis)  is  cost-effective  vis-à-vis  two-step  organogenesis,  the  latter  was  
widely adopted because of its responsiveness in rice. 
   Physiology of the donor plant is an important contributory factor for the success  
of rice anther culture. Anthers of panicles collected from field-grown plants have  
been decided better in their anther culture response than anthers collected from pot  
plants placed in the greenhouse or near the field (Veeraraghavan 2007). Second, the  
microspore stage is considered as an important factor for androgenic response. An  
easily observable morphological trait of the plant that shows good correlation with  
the pollen development stage is used as a guide to identify the required stage of the  
microspore (Nurhasanah et al. 2016). Usually, the distance between the collar of the  
flag leaf and the ligule of the penultimate leaf of the tiller serves as a reliable guide  
to anther maturity. The most suitable stage of microspore development has been  
described as the late uninucleate to early binucleate stage. However, the appropriate  
microspore stage for effective androgenic response was reported as early as mid-  
uninucleate stage (Fig.  1a). 

----------------------- Page 437-----------------------

428                                                                                S. Samantaray et al. 

Fig. 1   Androgenesis in rice hybrids (CRHR32 and BS6444G). (a) Early to mid-uninucleate stages  
of  microspore;  (b)  callus  induction;  (c)  green  spot  indicating  shoot  bud  emergence;  (d)  shoot  
elongation; (e) albino shoot regeneration; (f) root to microshoots 

    A wide range of chemical and physical factors influences androgenesis in vitro.  
The most widely used pretreatment for androgenesis is low-temperature shock with  
appropriate duration. Mishra et al. (2013) assessed the influence of cold pretreatment  
at 10 °C for 7–9 days on the anther culture response of Rajalaxmi (CRHR 5) and  
Ajay (CRHR 7), which showed a positive influence on callus induction frequency  
irrespective of the media and plant growth regulators (PGRs) employed; prolonged  
treatment  over  the  optimum  duration  proved  to  be  inhibitory  for  androgenesis.  
However, cold treatment (10 °C) for 8 days was found to be effective for callus  
induction and green-plant regeneration in a popular  indica rice hybrid, BS6444G  

----------------------- Page 438-----------------------

Doubled Haploids in Rice Improvement: Approaches, Applications, and Future Prospects      429 

(Naik et al. 2017). In addition, 2 days of preincubation period at 10 °C was quite  
interesting  for  the  success  of  androgenesis  in  a  long-duration  indica  rice  hybrid  
(Rout et al. 2016). 
   The most commonly used basal media for anther culture are N6, MS, B5, and  
Potato-2 medium. Subsequently, several media (MSN, SK1, He2, and RZ) were  
developed  from  N6  media  by  modifying  the  nitrogen  rates  and  sources,  carbon  
content and sources, and changes in vitamins and their concentrations, which were  
found to be encouraging for anther response in rice. N6 media were found to induce  
maximum callusing in Taraori Basmati (Grewal et al. 2006). Min et al. (2016) found  
out  the  best  media  for  androgenesis  in  the  generation  of  DHs  from  F s  of  two 1 
intervarietal crosses in terms of callusing (N6) and shoot regeneration (½MS) after  
a trial with 16 different media. However, two basal media, such as N6 and MS, were  
found to be effective for callusing and green-shoot regeneration, respectively, in  
indica rice hybrids (Rout et al. 2016; Naik et al. 2017). 
   Considering  the  importance  of  plant  growth  regulators  in  tissue  culture,  the  
effects of different PGRs were investigated for androgenesis. Even though 2,4-D  
has proven to be a potent auxin for callus induction from cultured anthers, medium  
with lower 2,4-D rates was found to be more effective for the regeneration ability of  
calli induced in  indica rice than higher 2,4-D rates (Fig.  1b). The calli developed  
green spots in 7–10 days after transfer to media supplemented with NAA (0.5 mg/L),  
BAP  (1.0  mg/L),  and  Kn  (1.0  mg/L),  which  adequately  supported  green-plant  
regeneration  from  subcultured  calli  (Fig.  1c,  d).  The  type  and  concentration  of  
auxins  seem  to  determine  the  pathway  of  microspore  development  with  2,4-D  
inducing callus formation and IAA and NAA promoting direct embryogenesis (Ball  
et al. 1993). The 2,4-D was found effective for callus response while the combinations  
of NAA, Kn, and BAP showed shoot regeneration in the generation of DHs from F s 1 
of two intervarietal crosses and hybrid rice (Min et al. 2016; Rout et al. 2016; Naik  
et al. 2017). 
   The nitrogen composition supplied in the form of nitrate and/or ammonium  
ions in culture media plays a significant role in androgenesis. The ratio of nitrate  
(NO3−): ammonium (NH4+) has been observed to be an important determinant  

for the success of anther culture as well as for the in vitro induction of embryo- 
genic calli in  indica rice (Grimes and Hodges  1990). Ivanova and Van Staden  
(2009) investigated the elimination of total nitrogen in media, resulting in lim- 
ited ability of proliferation and shoot growth, but higher ability was observed in  
media containing NO3− as the only sole nitrogen source, whereas replacing the  
NH4+ with NO3− decreased the rate of hyperhydricity. Herath et al. (2007) proved  

that the frequency of callus induction was improved by modifying three differ- 
ent media (N6, B5, and Miller) with one- half the rate of NH4+ and double the  

rate of KNO  nitrogen.3 
   A carbohydrate source is essential for androgenesis because of the osmotic and  
nutritional effects. Naik et al. (2017) aptly demonstrated the superiority of maltose  
over sucrose as the carbon source in rice anther culture for callusing. Replacing  
sucrose (146 mM) with maltose (146 mM) in the callus induction medium had a  
significant positive effect on anther response in both indica and japonica  types, with  

----------------------- Page 439-----------------------

430                                                                       S. Samantaray et al. 

a greater effect on indica rice. With respect to the effect of light quality on anther  
culture,  the  embryogenic  induction  of  microspores  is  inhibited  by  high-intensity  
white  light,  whereas  darkness  or  low-intensity  white  light  is  found  encouraging  
(Bjørnstad et al.  1989). The incubation of anthers continuously in the dark has, on  
occasion, been found to be essential. 
   Most in vitro morphogenic responses are genotype-dependent. In general, indica  
rice  cultivars  exhibit  poor-androgenic  response  vis-à-vis  japonica   ones.  Even  
among the  indica cultivars, a considerable variation in microspore callusing and  
green-shoot regeneration has been observed (Rout et al. 2016; Naik et al. 2017). The  
highest callus-responsive cultivars often show the best regeneration frequency and  
the   best   responsive   genotypes   to   callusing   exhibit   low-regeneration   ability.  
Therefore, selection of a single step, either callus improvement or shoot regeneration  
alone,  may  not  help  in  establishing  an  effective  androgenic  method.  It  is  rather  
important to identify genotypes carrying the two traits for overall improvement in  
anther culture efficiency. 
   The occurrence of a large proportion of albinos among the regenerated plants  
following anther culture is the most frustrating feature of androgenesis and this  
remains a formidable obstacle for application to rice breeding. The frequency of  
albinos can vary from 5% to 100% (Talebi et al. 2007). Indica rice cultivars are  
more prone to this problem than japonica  cultivars. Several factors, including  
pretreatment  conditions  and  culture  medium,  affect  the  frequency  of  albinos,  
which  could  be  considerably  decreased  by  shortening  the  culture  period  
(Asaduzzaman et al. 2003). The presence of large-scale deletions in some plas- 
tid genomes of the albino haploid plants derived from anther culture of japon - 
ica  ×  indica  hybrids  and  absence  of  such  deletions  in  green  regenerants  
(Yamagishi 2002) appeared to suggest a role for the plastid genome in determin- 
ing  the  albino  phenotype. The  albinos  (60–100%)  in  the  regeneration  culture  
proved  to  be  detrimental  for  optimizing  an  androgenic  response  (Fig.  1e).  
Therefore, ICAR-NRRI, India, attempted to develop a protocol for the suppres- 
sion  of  albinism,  which  led  to  standardization  of  a  100%  albino-free  shoot  
regeneration method in indica rice (patent filed 1355/KOL/2015 titled “Method  
for albino-free shoot regeneration in rice through anther culture”). 
   The well-developed shoots were transferred to MS media supplemented with  
2.0 mg/L NAA, 0.5 mg/L Kn, and 5% sucrose for rooting. Root induction starts  
7  days  after  transfer,  followed  by  profuse  rooting  after  4  weeks  of  culture  
(Fig. 1f). 

3     Diploidization of Haploid Genomes 

Haploids can be diploidized (duplication of chromosomes) to produce homozygous  
plants. There are two approaches for haploidy diploidization. 

----------------------- Page 440-----------------------

Doubled Haploids in Rice Improvement: Approaches, Applications, and Future Prospects                       431 

3.1      Artificial Genome Doubling  

Artificial  genome  doubling  is  the  most  popular  method  applied  for  doubling  
genomes in large-scale DH production. Colchicine, an antimicrotubule drug, has  
been  widely  used  and  is  the  most  effective  genome-doubling  agent.  Colchicine  
duplicates the genome by binding to tubulins and inhibits microtubule polymerization  
(Kleiber  et  al.  2012;  Prasanna  et  al. 2012; Weber 2014).  However,  colchicine  is  
highly toxic, which is not only potentially carcinogenic but also hazardous to the  
environment (Melchinger et al. 2016). The effects of other agents with lower toxicity  
on chromosome doubling, such as amiprophos-methyl (APM), oryzalin, pronamide,  
and trifluralin (all of which are herbicides), have been reported (Wan et al.  1991;  
Häntzschel and Weber 2010; Murovec and Bohanec 2012). 

3.2       Spontaneous Genome Doubling 

Spontaneous genome doubling is cost-effective and has been reported in several  
cereals, including rice. The frequency of spontaneous genome doubling is reported  
to be 50–60% in rice (Seguí-Simarro and Nuez  2008). However, interestingly, a  
recent report on rice hybrid BS6444G showed 90–99% spontaneous doubling (Naik  
et al. 2017). The doubling rate fluctuates extremely among genotypes (Chalyk 1994;  
Kleiber et al. 2012). Endomitosis is one of the phenomena of doubling the number  
of chromosomes without division of the nucleus. The haploid cells in general are  
unstable  in  culture,  with  a  tendency  to  undergo  endomitosis.  This  property  of  
haploid  cells  is  exploited  for  diploidization  to  produce  homozygous  plants.  The  
procedure  involves  growing  a  small  segment  of  haploid  plant  stem  in  a  suitable  
medium supplemented with growth regulators (auxin and cytokinin). This induces  
callus formation followed by differentiation. During callus growth, chromosomal  
doubling   occurs   by   endomitosis.   This   results   in   the   production   of   diploid  
homozygous cells and ultimately true homozygous plants. 

4      Characterization of Regenerants: Ploidy Analysis 

After a successful haploid induction and the regeneration procedure, evaluation of  
regenerants is needed to distinguish doubled haploids from redundant heterozygous  
diploids grown in the net house (Fig.  2a). During the production of homozygous  
lines, various undesired heterozygous plantlets can be obtained. In anther culture,  
these plants can be regenerated from the somatic tissue of inoculated plant organs  
such  as  anther  wall  cells,  tapetum,  and  filaments.  Reliable  and  fast  selection  of  
regenerants is therefore necessary before further employment of putative haploids  
and doubled haploids. 

----------------------- Page 441-----------------------

432                                                                                    S. Samantaray et al. 

Fig. 2   Ploidy status in green regenerants. (a) A  plants grown in net house; (b) morphological 0 
discrimination of ploidy status; (c) SSR marker (RM480) differentiating somatic tissue-derived  
heterozygotes from DHs. M = 100-bp DNA ladder; C = CRMS31A; R = CRL22R; H = CRHR32;  
1–3 to 5–20 = DHs; 4 = heterozygote (arrow) 

    Variations  in  nuclear  DNA  content  of  cultured  plant  tissues  resulted  in  
changes in ploidy level, which in turn changes the phenotypic characters of the  
regenerants, termed as triploid, tetraploid, polyploid, and aneuploid. This kind  
of variability occurred especially in chromosome number variations of regener- 
ated plants, that is, ploidy changes: deletion, duplication, and rearrangements  
(d’Amato 1989). The chromosome aberrations influenced agronomic traits and  
the ploidy level of rice plants (Zhang and Chu  1984). Since the isolated anthers  
sometimes become contaminated from the anther wall tissues, the developed  
calli  may  be  of  mixed  type  such  as  haploid,  diploid,  triploid,  and  tetraploid  
(Dunwell 2010). 
    Different ploidy status can be evaluated through several approaches. 

4.1      Morphological  

Fertile diploids can be well-distinguished from other ploids such as haploids, trip- 
loids, and polyploids through morphological evaluation (Fig. 2b). The diploids or  
putative DHs show normal morphological appearance with 70–80% grain fertility,  
whereas the polyploids are tall, large, and possess broad thick leaves with less than  
1%  spikelet  fertility.  Short  stature  with  no  spikelet  fertility  confirms  haploids.  
Sometimes, mixploids are observed in the regenerants, which can be discriminated  
by observing grain type after grain maturity (Fig. 2b). 

----------------------- Page 442-----------------------

Doubled Haploids in Rice Improvement: Approaches, Applications, and Future Prospects                                                    433 

4.2          Cytological 

Of the several methods tested earlier, the classical cytological approach was thought  
to be ideal to determine ploidy status. Ploidy status in plants can be determined by  
counting  the  chromosomes  of  root  tip  cells  arrested  in  metaphase  stage  (Mishra  
et al. 2015). However, this approach is tedious and time-consuming and also requires  
expertise.  This  is  also  considered  an  unambiguous  method.  Most  importantly,  
tissues containing dividing cells may not always be readily available for analysis. 

4.3        Pollen Fertility Analysis  

Stomatal density and size, the size of pollen grains, cell size, and plant size are  
mainly considered to analyze the ploidy level in DHs, out of which a cytology-  
based  approach  through  pollen  size  determination  was  used  as  an  alternative,  
convenient, rapid, and reliable method to assess the ploidy level in several plant  
species (Zonneveld and Van Iren 2001). This method also has its own demerits like  
cytology. 

4.4        Flow Cytometry  

Since the nuclear DNA content and the ploidy level have close association, flow  
cytometry is the most reliable method and it has wide application in plant-ploidy  
analysis (Ochatt 2008; Cousin et al. 2009; X Wang et al. 2016). It is frequently used  
to  analyze  the  ploidy  level  of  individuals  obtained  from  experiments  of  haplo-  
diploidization or chromosome doubling (Grewal et al.  2009; Ochatt et al. 2009).  
This method was used to discriminate the ploidy status of the regenerants developed  
from rice hybrids (Mishra et al. 2015). 

4.5        High-Throughput Cell Analysis  

Most  recently,  a  quick  and  precise  ploidy  determination  method  was  developed  
using high-throughput cell analysis (Sahoo et al.  2019). This is useful to analyze  
nuclear DNA content-based ploidy validation of a large number of samples. 
     None of these approaches could differentiate DHs from heterozygotes (somatic  
tissue-derived diploids), for which molecular markers might be the best option for  
the identification of true DHs (Rout et al. 2016; Naik et al. 2017). 

----------------------- Page 443-----------------------

434                                                                                S. Samantaray et al. 

4.6     Molecular Markers  

Genomic molecular markers are highly heritable, available in high numbers,  
and often exhibit enough polymorphism to discriminate closely related geno- 
types.  Simple  sequence  repeats  (SSRs)  are  abundant  and  well-distributed  
throughout the rice genome. They are the most commonly used markers for  
understanding  the  source  of  origin  (originated  from  the  microspore  mother  
cells  or  embryogenesis  from  diploid  somatic  tissue),  parental  contribution  
(allelic frequencies), and homozygosity in plant derivatives. SSRs have been  
successfully  used  to  identify  homozygous  spontaneous-doubled  haploids  in  
rice hybrids (Fig. 2c). 

5      Application of DHs in Rice Improvement 

To meet the challenge of food security for the increasing population amid dimin- 
ishing resources such as cultivable land and irrigation water along with climate  
change  associated  with  unpredictable  and  unseasonal  weather  patterns,  the  
development of high-yielding rice varieties is required to feed the ever-growing  
population. Hybrid rice is considered as a best option to break through the yield  
barrier,   showing   significant   yield   advantages   over   conventional   cultivars.  
Although hybrid rice can outyield conventional cultivars by 30–40% in produc- 
tion fields, it does not gain in popularity among Indian farmers because of its  
complicated  seed  production  system,  purchase  of  nonreplaceable  seed  every  
season (as it segregates in consequent seasons), higher seed cost, less-preferred  
quality, and vulnerability to abiotic and biotic stresses. Therefore, we need to  
find an alternative way to exploit hybrid potential in fixing heterosis along with  
the associated problems for which DH technology was found to be efficient in  
the rapid fixation of favorable alleles for yield and related traits. The DH breed- 
ing technique shortens the time required for breeding a new variety from the  
usual ~8 to ~5 years, thus saving time, labor, and financial resources. Conversely,  
the DH technique could be more appropriate for developing new varieties from  
photosensitive rice genotypes. Most of these advances were achieved in japon - 
ica cultivars, which were amenable to anther culture, rather than in indica rice.  
Significantly, several varieties and improved parental lines have been developed  
through androgenic approaches, but restricted to only japonica  rice cultivars.  
However,  the  use  of  anther  culture  as  a  routine  technique  for  breeding  is  
extremely limited in  indica rice due to the poor induction of androgenic calli  
and subsequent plant regeneration. An efficient androgenic protocol could gen- 
erate a considerable number of DHs for various applications. 

----------------------- Page 444-----------------------

Doubled Haploids in Rice Improvement: Approaches, Applications, and Future Prospects                                                                     435 

Fig. 3   Promising doubled haploids derived from rice hybrids (CRHR32 and BS6444G). (a) DHs  
of  BS6444G  showing  yield  equal  to  that  of  the  parent;  (b)  grain  quality  of  DH  lines  of  
hybrid BS6444G 

5.1          Performance of DHs Derived from Hybrid Rice  

The DH technique was used to overcome the constraints associated with indica rice  
hybrids: (1) expensive seed, depriving Indian marginal farmers from using the seed  
year after year; and (2) unpredictable environmental conditions and synchronized  
flowering. Standardization of DH technology in rice hybrids (PHB71 and KRH2)  
generated DHs from which two were released as varieties, Satyakrishna in 2008 and  
Phalguni  in  2010.  Subsequently,  androgenic  protocols  in  two  more  indica  rice  
hybrids, CRHR32 (an elite long-duration  indica rice hybrid developed at NRRI,  
Cuttack) and BS6444G (a popular rice hybrid, Bayer Seed Pvt. Ltd., Hyderabad),  
generated a considerable number of DHs (Rout et al. 2016; Naik et al. 2017). Some  
of the DHs showed grain yield on par with that of the parent rice hybrids (Fig. 3a);  
the grain quality of the DHs was also higher than that of the rice hybrids (Fig. 3b). 

5.2          Mapping of Genes and QTLs for Biotic and Abiotic Stress  

A quantitative trait locus (QTL) is the genomic region that contributes toward dis- 
crete traits, governed by multiple genes. In plant species, QTLs are the major deter- 
minants of important agronomic traits and mapping these genomic regions onto the  
specific chromosomal locations is vital for their application for crop improvement.  
Among the different mapping populations used for mapping QTLs in plants, dou- 
bled-haploid populations have their own significance. Since the effects of QTLs are  
small and are greatly influenced by environmental factors, this necessitates accurate  
phenotyping   with   replicated   trials   under   different   environmental   conditions.  
Therefore, DH populations are among the few mapping populations with true breed- 
ing  nature  that  can  facilitate  effective  mapping  of  QTLs  in  plants.  In  addition,  
DH-mapping populations are developed in a short time, in one generation, as com- 
pared with other nonsegregating, true-breeding populations such as near- isogenic  
lines (NILs) and recombinant inbred lines (RILs). Therefore, DH populations are an  
effective and efficient source for mapping of genes and QTLs (Forster and Thomas  

----------------------- Page 445-----------------------

436                                                                        S. Samantaray et al. 

2003; Forster et al. 2007). Subsequently, DH breeding through androgenesis has  
emerged  as  a  potent  tool  and  a  suitable  alternative  to  other  techniques  for  crop  
improvement (Purwoko et al. 2010; Germana 2011). 
    A doubled-haploid population was used to map rice blast resistance genes and  
QTLs in a more efficient way (Z Wang et al. 2001). A DH population from a cross  
between blast-resistant variety Zhai Ye Qing 8 and susceptible variety Jin Xi17 was  
used  in  combination  with  cDNA-amplified  fragment  length  polymorphism  and  
bulked segregant analysis to identify rice blast resistance genes (Zheng et al. 2004).  
Subsequently, Fatah et al. (2014) used DH lines developed from IR64 and Azucena  
to map QTL regions having major blast resistance genes. A QTL responsible for  
rice blast disease resistance was also mapped using a combination of DH mapping  
population consisting of 88 lines (DH lines), derived by crossing Joiku No. 462 (a  
blast-resistant  line)  and  Jokei06214  (a  blast-susceptible  line).  Besides  leaf  blast,  
three main QTLs for neck blast resistance were identified and mapped onto rice  
chromosomes 10 (qNBL-10), 9 (qNBL-9), and 5 (qNBL-5) using a DH population  
from a cross between IR64 and Azucena, and the DH lines displayed complete neck  
blast resistance under field conditions (Hittalmani et al. 2000). 
    Similarly, QTLs linked to resistance to another major rice disease, sheath blight,  
were identified in a DH population. Kunihiro et al. (2002) employed indica rice line  
Zhai Ye Qing 8 (ZYQ8) and japonica  rice line Jing Xi 17 (JX17), along with their  
DH  population,  to  identify  four  sheath  blight  resistance  (ShBR)  QTLs,  qSBR-2,  
qSBR-3, qSBR-7, and qSBR-11, and mapped them on chromosomes 2, 3, 7, and 11,  
respectively. A DH population derived from japonica  rice line Maybelle and indica  
rice line Baiyeqiu was also used to map a ShBR QTL using marker-assisted selection  
(MAS) (Xu et al. 2011). Zeng et al. (2015) developed a DH population by crossing  
japonica   rice  line  CJ06  and  indica  line  TN1,  which  underwent  field  evaluation  
under  three  different  environmental  conditions.  They  identified  a  total  of  eight  
QTLs each for lesion height (LH) and disease rating (DR) under three environments. 
    Besides for rice diseases, DH lines are used for mapping QTLs for insect resis- 
tance. Using DH lines developed by crossing IR64 and Azucena, six QTLs linked  
with brown planthopper (BPH) resistance in rice were mapped (Soundararajan et al.  
2004). Using the same DH population, Geethanjali et al. (2009) identified QTLs  
responsible for white-backed planthopper (WBPH) resistance. Later, a DH popula- 
tion obtained from a cross between Cheonhcheong and Nagdong was used to iden- 
tify and map QTLs for WBPH resistance. Further, the F  rice line derived from a 1 
cross  between  JSNDH13  (BPH-resistant)  and  CNDH32  (WBPH-resistant)  was  
used to develop a DH line having resistance to both insect pests (Yi et al. 2015). 
    Efforts are also made to map QTLs contributing to viral disease resistance in  
rice. Among two DH populations derived from crosses between IR64 and Azucena,  
and IRAT177 and Apura, the DH population derived from the former cross could  
map a QTL responsible for rice yellow mottle virus resistance to chromosome 12 of  
the rice genome (Ghesquière et al.  1997). 
    Further, anther culture was used to develop a mapping population from Savitri (a  
high-yielding indica rice variety) × Pokkali (a salt-tolerant indica rice genotype) for  
the identification of salt tolerance QTLs/genes. A systematic study with 117 DHs  

----------------------- Page 446-----------------------

Doubled Haploids in Rice Improvement: Approaches, Applications, and Future Prospects                                      437 

                  LOC_Os01g09550 
  RM283 
                  LOC_Os01g09560 
(4.88 Mb)                                                                              RM247             LOC_Os12g06560 
                                                                                      (3.18 Mb)          LOC_Os12g06570 
                                            RM324             LOC_Os02g19490 
                                          (11.38 Mb) 

           Ch # 1                                       Ch # 2                                    Ch # 12 

Fig. 4   Identified four candidate genes for salinity tolerance at germination stage using a doubled-  
haploid mapping population (Savitri × Pokkali) 

derived from F s of Savitri and Pokkali (developed at ICAR-NRRI, Cuttack) was 1 
able  to  identify  four  candidate  genes,  LOC_Os01g09550  (no  apical  meristem  
protein),  LOC_Os01g09560  (mitochondrial  processing  peptidase  subunit  alpha),  
LOC_Os12g06560  (putative  protein),  and  LOC_Os12g06570  (cyclic  nucleotide-  
gated ion channel), for salinity tolerance at germination stage (Fig. 4). 

5.3       Development of Improved Lines and Rice Cultivars  

Anther culture technology is able to fix all segregating loci (100%) in one genera- 
tion (Purwoko et al. 2010) rather than eight to ten inbreeding generations with the  
conventional  approach.  Furthermore,  it  is  able  to  maintain  maximum  genetic  
variance and heritability (Prigge et al. 2012), thus providing an opportunity to select  
transgressive  segregants/superior  genotypes  at  a  very  early  stage. Anther  culture  
provides high reproducibility for early-selection results, which is efficient in trait  
improvement strategies with simplified steps (Dicu and Cristea 2016). Hence, it is  
found  to  be  an  economically  viable  option  for  accelerating  breeding  with  more  
selection accuracy and breeding value (Rober et al. 2005). 
     Given the scenario of dynamic demographics and diversified quality preferences,  
breeding  varieties  combined  for  higher  yield,  more  enhanced  quality  traits,  and  
wider acceptability are major concerns. Grain quality in rice hybrids is found to be  
a major limitation in hybridization of rice area in India (Babu et al. 2013). Using  
genetically diverse parental lines with similar quality parameters are found to be a  
workable strategy to address quality concerns in hybrids. The DH approach in turn  
is a probable means of helping to overcome quality problems in hybrids as it is quite  
efficient in developing transgressive segregants with superior quality that might be  

----------------------- Page 447-----------------------

438                                                                                            S. Samantaray et al. 

useful as parents for hybrid rice research and for cultivar release. Several varieties  
and  improved  parental  lines  have  been  developed  and  exploited  for  cultivar  
development, mostly with a japonica  genetic background (Grewal et al. 2011). This  
technology  is  observed  to  be  useful  in  creating  immortalized  genetic  units  from  
genetic resources to make them amenable to crop improvement. The libraries of DH  
lines help in making genetic resources accessible to crop improvement by linking  
molecular inventories of gene banks with meaningful phenotypes. Thus, a decrease  
in the breeding cycle per se in varietal development has substantial economic impact  
on rice breeding by saving developmental costs and maximizing genetic gain in a  
short span of time in a more precise way. 
    Doubled  haploids  have  been  released  for  commercialization  in  several  crops,  
including  rice.  In  addition,  DHs  are  used  as  parents  in  developing  rice  hybrids  
(Mishra and Rao 2016). In rice, more than 100 rice breeding lines or varieties have  
been developed and released in China, India, Japan, South Korea, Hungary, and the  
United States (Siddique 2015). 
    Rice varieties such as Huayu I, Huayu II, Xin Xiu, Late Keng 959, Tunghua 1,  
Tunghua  2,  Tunghua  3,  Zhonghua  8,  Zhonghua  9,  Huahanzao,  Huajian  7902,  
Tanghuo 2, Shanhua 7706, and Huahanzao 77001 are high-yielding varieties with  
superior grain quality and resistance to blast and bacterial blight diseases (Zhang  
1989; Hu and Zeng 1984; Chen et al. 1986). Nanhua 5, Noll, Hua 03, and Guan 18  
have early maturity, good quality, and disease resistance (Zhu and Pan 1990). Huayu  
15 is resistant to lodging and diseases and has good quality (Shouyi and Shouyin  
1991). Milyang 90 has good-grain quality and is resistant to brown planthopper and  
stripe virus disease (Chung 1987). Hwacheongbyeo, Joryeongbyeo, and Hwajinbyeo  
are resistant to BPH, rice stripe tenui-virus, blast, and bacterial blight (Lee et al.  
1988). Bicoll (IR51500AC11-1) has salt tolerance (Senadhira et al. 2002) in China,  
South Korea, and the Philippines. Salinity-tolerant DH line AC-1 was developed at  
IRRI,  Philippines,  and  is  commercialized  for  salinity-prone  areas  of  Bangladesh  
(Thomson et al. 2010). Table 1 lists the commercialized DH rice varieties. 
    In India, the National Rice Research Institute (NRRI), Cuttack, began DH work  
during 1997 to overcome the constraints associated with indica rice hybrids, that is,  
expensive seed, which led to preventing marginal farmers from using the seed over  
the years, and unpredictable environmental conditions. NRRI released two DH vari- 
eties, Satyakrishna (CR Dhan 10) in 2008 and Phalguni (CR Dhan 801) in 2010. In  
addition,  rice  variety  Parag  401  (Patil  et  al.  1997)  was  also  bred  through  DH  
breeding. 

5.4       Biofortification of Rice for Essential Traits  

Being a premier food crop, rice serves as the major source of energy, protein,  
thiamine, riboflavin, niacin, and micronutrients (Fe, Zn, Ca) in the diet (Juliano  
1997). However, owing to deficiency for essential micronutrients (“hidden hun- 
ger”), it is unable to address the nutritional food security of the country. Among  

----------------------- Page 448-----------------------

Doubled Haploids in Rice Improvement: Approaches, Applications, and Future Prospects           439 

Table 1   Rice doubled haploids commercialized in different countries 

 Country      Name of DH                                                 Important features 
 India        Satyakrishna (CR Dhan 10)                                  High yield, higher  
              Phalguni (CR Dhan 801)                                     quality 

 China        Huayu I, Huayu II, Xin Xiu, Late Keng 959, Tunghua 1,      High yield, superior  
              Tunghua 2, Tunghua 3, Zhonghua 8, Zhonghua 9,              grain quality, resistance  
              Huahanzao, Huajian 7902, Tanghuo 2, Shanhua 7706,          to blast and bacterial  
              Huahanzao 77001, Tanfeng 1, Huayu III, Ta Be 78,           blight diseases 
              Guan 18 
 South        Nanhua 5, Noll, Hua 03, Guan 18                            Early maturity, good  
 Korea                                                                   quality, and disease  
                                                                         resistance 
 Philippines  AC-1                                                       Salinity tolerance 
 Japan        Joiku N. 394, Hirohikari, Hirohonami AC No. 1,             High yield, quality type,  
              Kibinohana                                                 cold resistance 
 Argentina    Patei and Moccoi                                           High yield 
 Hungary      Dama                                                       High yield 

the micronutrient malnutrition conditions, Fe and Zn deficiencies are of major  
concern not only because of their serious health consequences but also of the  
number of people affected worldwide. Hence, enriching rice grain with iron and  
zinc is likely to have tremendous health benefits for the rice-eating population.  
In  addition,  the  presence  of  a  substantial  amount  of  phytate  (0.06–2.22%)  in  
rice, which inhibits the absorption of Fe and Zn, needs to be lowered (Liang  
et al.  2007). Hence, biofortification of rice varieties with enhanced content of  
protein, iron, and zinc and lower phytate would be an ideal goal. Biofortification  
is a promising food-based approach for helping to overcome micronutrient mal- 
nutrition. Significant efforts have been made over the past decade to biofortify  
the major cereals targeted to different parts of the world and a lot of progress has  
already been achieved in this endeavor. There are two distinct ways in which the  
nutritional value of cereals can be enhanced. The first is by using the genetic  
variation available through breeding or genetic engineering. Another promising  
approach is the doubled-haploid method, in which fixed genetic materials can be  
developed  faster  relative  to  other  mapping  populations  and  can  be  evaluated  
across  years  and  locations  readily.  This  method  has  less-genetic  background  
noise than in traditional breeding methods, which makes it an important genetic  
resource for mapping QTLs/genes for various traits related to biofortification.  
Several reports have shown the utility of DH populations in identifying QTLs  
for the concentration of micronutrients in rice grain. Recently, two DH popula- 
tions developed by IRRI were evaluated to map the QTLs related to agronomic  
traits and grain micronutrients (Swamy et al. 2018). Considerable genetic varia- 
tion has been observed for all traits in these DH populations. These kinds of DH  
lines can be used as donors in breeding programs or can be directly tested in  
multilocation trials to further evaluate their performance. 

----------------------- Page 449-----------------------

440                                                                                                   S. Samantaray et al. 

5.5       Exchange of Cytoplasmic and Nuclear Genomes  

In Arabidopsis , both maternal and paternal haploids containing wild-type chromo- 
somes and maternal cytoplasm can be generated using CENH3-mediated haploid  
inducers as the male or female parent. Ravi et al. (2010) developed a CENH3-1  
GFP-tailswap haploid inducer with Ler cytoplasm: Ler-cytoplasmic haploid inducer  
(HI). When pollinating Ler-cytoplasmic HI with pollen from a wild type with Col-0  
cytoplasm or Col-0 WT, haploids with Col-0 WT chromosomes and Ler cytoplasm  
are generated. This method can be used to develop any combination of cytoplasmic  
and nuclear genomes by transferring the male nuclear genome into a heterologous  
cytoplasm rapidly and conveniently. This facilitates the production of new cytoplas- 
mic male sterile (CMS) lines for F  hybrid seed production. If the haploid inducer 1 
line has a CMS background, pollinating this HI line with different inbred lines gen- 
erates paternal haploids, which carry CMS. One or a few paternal haploids need to  
be pollinated with pollen from the maternal inbred to produce a new diploid CMS  
line. Using paternal haploids for cytoplasmic conversions have three distinct advan- 
tages: (1) only two generations are needed, (2) the new CMS line has 100% of the  
genomes of either of the inbred lines, and (3) chromosome doubling is not required  
(Weber 2014). This method has been employed in maize using the ig1 system for  
quite a while (Evans 2007). Most recently, knocking out the MATL ortholog in rice  
resulted in haploid induction at a rate of 2–6%, suggesting the functional conserva- 
tion of MATL, and this represents an advance for rice breeding (Yao et al. 2018). 

5.6       Reverse Breeding  

Hybrid seed is traditionally produced from a cross between two inbred lines. Dirks  
et al. (2009) proposed a novel plant breeding technology, reverse breeding, which  
can directly generate parental inbred lines from any hybrid. Three steps are required  
for  reverse  breeding:  (1)  inhibition  of  meiotic  crossover  in  F   plants  to  produce 1 
gametes  containing  combinations  of  nonrecombinant  parental  chromosomes,  (2)  
generation  of  DH  lines  via  in  vitro  unfertilized  ovule  or  anther  culture,  and  (3)  
regeneration of the original hybrid through crossing DH lines with complementary  
sets of parental chromosomes. 

5.7         Gene Stacking from Biparental Crosses 

Introgression  of  one  or  a  limited  number  of  genes  into  elite  inbreds  by  marker-  
assisted backcrossing is routine in plant breeding (Lübberstedt and Frei 2012). At  
the end of backcross programs, a heterozygous plant is selfed to produce a fixed  
line. For single-gene introgression, the expected probability of individuals with the  

----------------------- Page 450-----------------------

Doubled Haploids in Rice Improvement: Approaches, Applications, and Future Prospects                                441 

desired  homozygous  genotype  is  1/4.  The  frequency  of  expected  genotypes  
decreases  exponentially  following  the  formula  ¼(n),  where  n  is  the  number  of  

independently segregating genes (Lübberstedt and Frei 2012; Ravi et al. 2010; Shen  
et al. 2015). In contrast, haploid target genotypes are generated with a frequency of  
½(n) . For example, for five loci, the frequency of the desired homozygous genotype  

is 1/1024 in selfed diploid progenies and 1/32 in haploid progenies. The application  
of doubled haploids thus significantly decreases the population size required to find  
desirable genotypes. 

5.8       Accelerating Plant Breeding by MAS and GS  

The availability of cheap and abundant molecular markers allows breeders to apply  
marker-assisted selection (MAS) and genomic selection (GS) in crop improvement.  
MAS depends on the identification of markers significantly associated with a trait.  
MAS  allows  breeders  to  discard  a  large  number  of  plants  with  undesired  gene  
combinations, pyramid beneficial genes in subsequent generations, minimize field  
testing, and decrease the number of generations (Collard and Mackill 2008; Dwivedi  
et  al.  2015).  The  combination  of  MAS  and  DHs  offers  new  opportunities  for  
increasing genetic gain and shortens the time required for cultivar breeding. MAS  
and DHs have been successfully used to accelerate resistance breeding in cereal  
crops (Wessels and Botes 2014), which demonstrates the integration of MAS and  
DH technology to increase the speed of cultivar development vis-à-vis conventional  
breeding processes. 

5.9        Transgenic Research 

In general, the DH technique offers a rapid homozygous state attainment of heter- 
ologous  loci.  This  principle  can  be  used  in  transgenic  research  for  developing  
homozygous  plants  within  one  generation. The  selfing  of  transgenic  plants  after  
regeneration is usually the methodology followed to obtain homozygous plants for  
the transgenic loci. However, this requires two generations of selfing from positive-  
transformed plants for phenotypic validation. In contrast, anther culture of positive-  
transformed plants in T1 will result in homozygous conditions with one generation  
of  selfing.  Figure  5  gives  a  schematic  representation  of  the  segregation  of  the  
transgenic loci. Anther culture was successfully used for developing homozygous  
transgenic  rice  with  the  chitinase  gene  for  enhanced  sheath  blight  resistance  
(Baisakh et al. 2001). Further employment of anther culture could generate DHs  
from  transgenics-containing  genes  involved  in   β-carotene  metabolism  (Datta  
et al. 2014). 

----------------------- Page 451-----------------------

442                                                                               S. Samantaray et al. 

              Transgenic loci segregation               Transgenic loci segregation  
                      through selfing                     through doubled haploid 

                   Transformation positive                   Transformation positive 
                 callus in selection medium                callus in selection medium 

                   Regeneration        (A/-)                  Regeneration      (A/-) 
                                                  T1 
                               Selfing                    Anther           Anther culture +  
                                                          culture            spraying with  
                                                                               herbicide  
                          A/- 
                                                          AA  :  -/- 
                                                                               AA   
                               Selfing                      1    :   1 

                   AA  :  A/- :   -/-                          Phenotypic validation 
                    1    :   2   :   1            T2 

           Phenotypic validation 

Fig. 5   Segregation of transgenic loci in selfed plants and anther culture plants 

6      Knowledge Gaps 

The  recalcitrant  nature  of  indica  rice  requires  optimization  of  the  anther  culture  
method, which is essential to achieve the potential yield of androgenesis technology  
in indica rice lines. In spite of attempts made by Rout et al. (2016) and Naik et al.  
(2017) with these concerns, additional novel attempts for media manipulation have  
to be made to increase callusing potential or somatic embryogenesis. In addition,  
the identification of genomic regions that contribute to promising yield in rice from  
heterotic F  hybrids has to be addressed by analyzing the genetic structure of DHs. 1 
Recent  studies  with  Arabidopsis  and  maize  (D  Wang  et  al.  2015)  suggest  that  
heterosis could be fixed by carefully combining genomic regions from the parents  
that contribute to higher performance. 

7      The Way Forward 

Given the importance of DHs in the quick fixation of segregating loci and varietal  
development, we need to develop novel media composition to increase the callusing  
potential of anthers from  indica rice. Simultaneously, we need to focus on direct  
somatic embryogenesis from microspores as this method is considered cost-effective  
among all the pathways in tissue culture. Moreover, the mechanism of spontaneous  
chromosome  doubling  in  androgenesis  requires  immediate  attention.  Conceptual  

----------------------- Page 452-----------------------

Doubled Haploids in Rice Improvement: Approaches, Applications, and Future Prospects                 443 

understanding of the superior yield of DHs is still not clear. Thus, the scientific basis  
of superior yield of DHs needs to be comprehensively studied through the genera- 
tion of a large number of DHs (~200 DHs from each hybrid). 

Acknowledgments   The  authors  acknowledge  the  director  general  of  ICAR  for  continuous  
guidance and support for the research  on doubled haploids at NRRI, Cuttack. We also greatly  
acknowledge the director of NRRI for his kind support and approval for bringing out a chapter on  
doubled haploids. 

References 

Asaduzzaman M, Bari MA, Rahman MH, Khatun N, Islam MA, Rahman M (2003) In vitro plant  
    regeneration through anther culture of five rice varieties. J Biol Sci 3(2):167–171 
Babu VR, Shreya K, Dangi KS, Usharani G, Nagesh P (2013) Evaluation of popular rice (Oryza  
    sativa L.) hybrids for quantitative, qualitative and nutritional aspects. Int J Sci Res Publ 3(1):1 
Baisakh N, Datta K, Oliva N, Ona I, Rao GJN, Mew TW, Datta SK (2001) Rapid development of  
    homozygous transgenic rice using anther culture-harboring rice chitinase gene for enhanced  
    sheath blight resistance. Plant Biotechnol 18(2):101–108 
Ball ST, Zhou H, Konzak CF (1993) Influence of 2,4-D, IAA, and duration of callus induction in  
    anther cultures of spring wheat. Plant Sci 90(2):195–200 
Bjørnstad A, Opsahl-Ferstad HG, Aasmo M (1989) Effects of donor plant environment and light  
    during incubation of anther cultures of some spring wheat (Triticum aestivum L.) cultivars.  
    Plant Cell Tissue Organ Cult 17:27–37 
Blakeslee AF, Belling J, Farnham ME, Bergner AD (1922) A haploid mutant in the jimson weed,  
    “Daturastramonium”. Science 55(1433):646–647 
Chalyk ST (1994) Properties of maternal haploid maize plants and potential application to maize  
    breeding. Euphytica 79:13–18 
Chen  JJ,  Hus YJ,  Tsay  HS  (1986)  Effect  of  iron  on  rice  anther  culture.  J  Agric  Res  China  
    35(3):244–252 
Chung  GS  (1987) Application  of  anther  culture  technique  for  rice  (Oryza  sativa  L.)  improve- 
    ment. In: Korea-China Plant Tissue Culture Symposium. Academia Sinica Publishers, Beijing,  
    pp 36–56 
Collard BC, Mackill DJ (2008) Marker-assisted selection: an approach for precision plant breeding  
    in the twenty-first century. Philos Trans R Soc Lond Biol 363:557–572 
Cousin A, Heel K, Cowling WA, Nelson MN (2009) An efficient high-throughput flow cytometric  
    method for estimating DNA ploidy level in plants. Cytom Part A 75(12):1015–1019 
d’Amato F (1989) Polyploidy in cell differentiation. Caryologia 42:183–211 
Datta  K,  Sahoo  G,  Krishnan  S,  Ganguly  M,  Datta  SK  (2014)  Genetic  stability  developed  for  
    β-carotene synthesis in BR29 rice line using dihaploid homozygosity. PLoS One 9(6):e100212 
Devaux P, Pickering R (2005) Haploids in the improvement of Poaceae. In: Palmer CE, Keller WA,  
    Kasha KJ (eds) Haploids in crop improvement II. Biotechnology in agriculture and forestry, vol  
    56. Springer, Berlin; New York, NY, pp 215–242 
Dicu G, Cristea S (2016) The efficiency use of doubled-haploid technology in maize breeding:  
    obtaining DH parent lines and hybrids. Sci Pap Ser A Agron 59:273–278 
Dirks R, Van Dun K, De Snoo CB, Van Den Berg M, Lelivelt CL, Voermans W, Woudenberg L,  
    De Wit JP, Reinink K, Schut JW, Van Der Zeeuw E (2009) Reverse breeding: a novel breeding  
    approach based on engineered meiosis. Plant Biotechnol J 7(9):837–845 
Dunwell  JM  (2010)  Haploids  in  flowering  plants:  origins  and  exploitation.  Plant  Biotechnol  J  
    8:377–424 

----------------------- Page 453-----------------------

444                                                                                   S. Samantaray et al. 

Dwivedi SL, Britt AB, Tripathi L, Sharma S, Upadhyaya HD, Ortiz R (2015) Haploids: constraints  
    and opportunities in plant breeding. Biotechnol Adv 33:812–829 
Evans MM (2007) The indeterminate gametophyte 1 gene of maize encodes a LOB domain protein  
    required for embryo sac and leaf development. Plant Cell 19(1):46–62 
Fatah T, Rafii MY, Rahim HA, Meon S, Azhar M, Latif MA (2014) Cloning and analysis of QTL  
    linked to blast disease resistance in Malaysian rice variety PongsuSeribu 2. Int J Agric Biol  
    16:395–400 
Forster BP, Thomas WTB (2003) Doubled haploids in genetic mapping and genomics. In: Doubled  
    haploid production in crop plants. Springer, Dordrecht, pp 367–390 
Forster BP, Heberle-Bors E, Kasha KJ, Touraev A (2007) The resurgence of haploids in higher  
    plants. Trends Plant Sci 12(8):368–375 
Geethanjali S, Kadirvel P, Gunathilagaraj K, Maheswaran M (2009) Detection of quantitative trait  
    loci (QTL) associated with resistance to white-backed planthopper (Sogatella furcifera) in rice  
    (Oryza sativa). Plant Breed 128:130–136 
Germana MA (2011) Anther culture for haploid and doubled haploid production. Plant Cell Tissue  
    Organ Cult 104(3):283–300 
Ghesquière A, Albar L, Lorieux M, Ahmadi N, Fargette D, Huang N, McCouch SR, Nottéghem JL  
    (1997) A major quantitative trait locus for rice yellow mottle virus resistance maps to a cluster  
    of blast resistance genes on chromosome 12. Phytopathology 87(12):1243–1249 
Grewal D, Gill R, Gosal SS (2006) Role of cysteine in enhancing androgenesis and regeneration  
    of indica rice (Oryza sativa L.). Plant Growth Regul 49(1):43–47 
Grewal RK, Lulsdorf M, Croser J, Ochatt S, Vandenberg A, Warkenti TD (2009) Doubled hap- 
    loid  production  in  chickpea  (Cicer  arietinum  L.):  role  of  stress  treatments.  Plant  Cell  Rep  
    28:1289–1299 
Grewal  D,  Manito  C,  Bartolome V  (2011)  Doubled  haploids  generated  through  anther  culture  
    from crosses of elite indica and japonica cultivars and/or lines of rice: large-scale production,  
    agronomic performance, and molecular characterization. Crop Sci 51(6):2544–2553. https:// 
    doi.org/10.2135/cropsci2011.04.0236 
Grimes HD, Hodges TK (1990) The inorganic NO3– : NH4+ ratio influences plant regeneration and  

    auxin sensitivity in primary callus derived from immature embryos of indica rice (Oryza sativa  
    L.). J Plant Physiol 136:362–367 
Guha S, Maheshwari SC (1964) In vitro production of embryos from anthers of Datura. Nature  
    204(4957):497 
Guha S, Maheshwari SC (1966) Cell division and differentiation of embryos in the pollen grains  
    of Datura in vitro. Nature 212:97–98 
Häntzschel  KR,  Weber  G  (2010)  Blockage  of  mitosis  in  maize  root  tips  using  colchicine-  
    alternatives. Protoplasma 241(1–4):99–104 
Herath HMI, Bandara DC, Samarajeewa PK (2007) Effect of culture media for anther culture of  
    indica rice varieties and hybrids of Indica and Japonica. Trop Agric Res Ext 10:17–22. https:// 
    doi.org/10.4038/tare.v10i0.1866 
Hittalmani S, Parco A, Mew TV, Zeigler RS, Huang N (2000) Fine-mapping and DNA marker-  
    assisted pyramiding of the three major genes for blast resistance in rice. Theor Appl Genet  
    100(7):1121–1128 
Hu H, Zeng JZ (1984) Development of new varieties via anther culture. In: Ammirato PV, Evans  
    DA, Sharp WR et al (eds) Handbook of plant cell culture, vol 3. Macmillan, New York, NY,  
    pp 65–90 
Ivanova M, Van Staden J (2009) Nitrogen source, concentration, and NH4+ :NO3– ratio influence  

    shoot  regeneration  and  hyperhydricity  in  tissue-cultured Aloe  polyphylla .  Plant  Cell Tissue  
    Organ Cult 99(2):167–174 
Jacquard C, Asakaviciute R, Hamalian AM, Sangwan RS, Devaux P, Clement C (2006) Barley  
    anther culture: effects of annual cycle and spike position on microspore embryogenesis and  
    albinism. Plant Cell Rep 25:375–381 
Juliano BO (1997) Rice products in Asia. FAO-RAP publication No. 38. FAO, Rome 

----------------------- Page 454-----------------------

Doubled Haploids in Rice Improvement: Approaches, Applications, and Future Prospects                445 

Kleiber D, Prigge V, Melchinger AE, Burkard F, San Vicente F, Palomino G, Gordillo GA (2012)  
    Haploid fertility in temperate and tropical maize germplasm. Crop Sci 52:623–630 
Kunihiro Y, Qian Q, Sato H, Teng S, Zeng DL, Fujimoto K, Zhu LH (2002) QTL analysis of sheath  
    blight resistance in rice (Oryza sativa L.). Chin J Genet 29:50–55 
Lee SY, Lee YT, Lee MS (1988) Studies on the anther culture of Oryza sativa L. 3. Growing envi- 
    ronment of donor plant in anther culture, effects of photoperiod and light intensity. Res Rep  
    Rural Dev Adm Biotechnol 30:7–12 
Liang J, Han B-Z, Han L, Robert Nout MJ, Hamer RJ (2007) Iron, zinc and phytic acid content of  
    selected rice varieties from China. J Sci Food Agric 87:504–510 
Lübberstedt T, Frei UK (2012) Application of doubled haploids for target gene fixation in back- 
    cross programmes of maize. Plant Breed 131(3):449–452 
Melchinger AE, Molenaar WS, Mirdita V, Schipprack W (2016) Colchicine alternatives for chro- 
    mosome doubling in maize haploids for doubled-haploid production. Crop Sci 56:559–569 
Min ZY, Li H, Zou T, Tong L, Cheng J, Sun XW (2016) Studies of in vitro culture and plant regen- 
    eration of unfertilized ovary of pumpkin. Chin Bull Bot 51(1):74–80 
Mishra R, Rao GJN (2016) In-vitro androgenesis in rice: advantages, constraints and future pros- 
    pects. Rice Sci 23:57–68 
Mishra R, Rao GJN, Rao RN (2013) Effect of cold pretreatment and phytohormones on anther  
    culture efficiency of two indica rice (Oryza sativa L.) hybrids, Ajay and Rajalaxmi. J Exp Biol  
    Agric Sci 1(2):69–76 
Mishra R, Rao GJN, Rao RN, Kaushal P (2015) Development and characterization of elite-dou- 
    bled haploid lines from two indica rice hybrids. Rice Sci 22(6):290–299 
Murovec J, Bohanec B (2012) Haploids and doubled haploids in plant breeding. In: Abdurakhmonov  
    I (ed) Plant breeding. InTech, Rijeka, pp 87–106 
Naik  N,  Rout  P,  Umakanta  N, Verma  RL,  Katara  JL,  Sahoo  KK  et  al  (2017)  Development  of  
    doubled haploids from an elite indica rice hybrid (BS6444G) using anther culture. Plant Cell  
    Tissue Organ Cult 128(3):679–689 
Niizeki H, Oono K (1968) Induction of haploid rice plant from anther culture. Proc Jpn Acad  
    44(6):554–557 
Nurhasanah, Pratama AN, Sunaryo W (2016) Anther culture of local upland rice varieties from  
    East  Kalimantan:  effect  of  panicle  cold  pre-treatment  and  putrescine-enriched  medium.  
    Biodiversitas 17(1):148–153 
Ochatt SJ (2008) Flow cytometry in plant breeding. Cytom Part A 73(7):581–598 
Ochatt  S,  Pech  C,  Grewal  R,  Conreux  C,  Lulsdorf  M,  Jacas  L  (2009) Abiotic  stress  enhances  
    androgenesis from isolated microspores of some legume species (Fabaceae). J Plant Physiol  
    166:1314–1328 
Patil VD, Nerkar YS, Misal MB, Harkal SR (1997) Parag 401, a semidwarf rice variety developed  
    through anther culture. Int Rice Res Notes 22(2):19 
Prasanna  BM,  Chaikam V,  Mahuku  G  (2012)  Doubled  haploid  technology  in  maize  breeding:  
    theory and practice. International Maize and Wheat Improvement Center (CIMMYT), Mexico 
Prigge V, Xu XW, Li L, Babu R, Chen SJ, Atlin GN, Melchinger AE (2012) New insights into the  
    genetics of in vivo induction of maternal haploids, the backbone of doubled haploid technology  
    in maize. Genetics 111:781–793 
Purwoko BS, Dewi IS, Khumaida K (2010) Rice anther culture to obtain doubled-haploids with  
    multiple tolerances. Asia Pac J Mol Biol Biotechnol 18(1):55–57 
Ravi M, Kwong PN, Menorca RM, Valencia JT, Ramahi JS, Stewart JL, Tran RK et al (2010)  
    The  rapidly  evolving  centromere-specific  histone  has  stringent  functional  requirements  in  
    Arabidopsis thaliana . Genetics 186:461–471 
Rober FK, Gordillo GA, Geiger HH (2005) In vivo haploid induction in maize: performance of new  
    inducers and significance of doubled haploid lines in hybrid breeding. Maydica 50:275–283 
Rout P, Naik N, Ngangkham U, Verma RL, Katara JL, Singh ON, Samantaray S (2016) Doubled  
    haploids generated through anther culture from an elite long-duration rice hybrid, CRHR32:  
    method optimization and molecular characterization. Plant Biotechnol 33(3):177–186 

----------------------- Page 455-----------------------

446                                                                               S. Samantaray et al. 

Sahoo SA, Jha Z, Verulkar SB, Srivastava AK, Suprasanna P (2019) High-throughput cell analysis  
    based protocol for ploidy determination in anther-derived rice callus. Plant Cell Tissue Organ  
    Cult 137(1):187–192 
Seguí-Simarro  JM,  Nuez  F  (2008)  How  microspores  transform  into  haploid  embryos:  changes  
    associated  with  embryogenesis  induction  and  microspore-derived  embryogenesis.  Physiol  
    Plant 134:1–12 
Senadhira D, Zapata-Arias FJ, Gregorio GB, Alejar MS, De La Cruz HC, Padolina TF, Galvez AM  
    (2002) Development of the first salt-tolerant rice cultivar through indica/indica anther culture.  
    Field Crop Res 76:103–110 
Shen Y, Pan G, Lubberstedt T (2015) Haploid strategies for functional validation of plant genes.  
    Trends Biotechnol 33:611–620 
Shouyi L, Shouyin H (1991) Huayu 15, a high-yielding rice variety bred by anther culture. In:  
    Bajaj YPS (ed) Biotechnology in agriculture and forestry, Volume 14: rice. Springer, Berlin;  
    New York, NY, pp 230–247 
Siddique R (2015) Impact of different media and genotypes in improving anther culture response  
    in rice (Oryza sativa) in Bangladesh. Eur Sci J 11(6) 
Soundararajan RP, Kadirvel P, Gunathilagaraj K, Maheswaran M (2004) Mapping of quantitative  
    trait loci associated with resistance to brown plant hopper in rice by means of a doubled haploid  
    population. Crop Sci 44:2214–2220 
Swamy BM, Descalsota GIL, Nha CT, Amparado A, Inabangan-Asilo MA, Manito C et al (2018)  
    Identification of genomic regions associated with agronomic and biofortification traits in DH  
    populations of rice. PLoS One 13(8):e0201756 
Talebi  R,  Rahemi  MR,  Arefi  H,  Nourozi  M,  Bagheri  N  (2007)  In  vitro  plant  regeneration  
    through anther culture of some Iranian local rice (Oryza sativa L.) cultivars. Pak J Biol Sci  
    10(12):2056–2060 
Thomson MJ, de Ocampo M, Egdane J, Rahman MA, Sajise AG, Adorada DL, Tumimbang-Raiz  
    E, Blumwald E, Seraj ZI, Singh K, Gregorio GB, Ismail AM (2010) Characterizing the Saltol  
    quantitative trait locus for salinity tolerance in rice. Rice 3(2):148–160 
Trejo-Tapia G, Amaya UM, Morales GS, Sanchez ADJ, Bonfil BM, Rodriguez-Monroy M, Jimenez-  
    Aparicio A (2002) The effects of cold-pretreatment, auxins and carbon source on anther culture  
    of rice. Plant Cell Tissue Organ Cult 71:41–46. https://doi.org/10.1023/A:1016558025840 
Veeraraghavan R (2007) A study on the comparison of anther culture response in different variet- 
    ies  of  rice  (Oryza  sativa  L.)  subspecies  indica.  University  of  Colombo,  Colombo.  PMCid:  
    PMC1891355 
Wan Y, Duncan DR, Rayburn AL, Petolino JF, Widholm JM (1991) The use of antimicrotubule  
    herbicides  for  the  production  of  doubled  haploid  plants  from  anther-derived  maize  callus.  
    Theor Appl Genet 81:205–211 
Wang Z, Taramino G, Yang D, Liu G, Tingey SV, Miao GH, Wang GL (2001) Rice ESTs with  
    disease-resistance gene- or defense-response gene-like sequences mapped to regions contain- 
    ing major resistance genes or QTLs. Mol Gen Genomics 265(2):302–310 
Wang D, Yu C, Zuo T, Zhang J, Weber DF, Peterson T (2015) Alternative transposition generates  
    new chimeric genes and segmental duplications at the maize p1 locus. Genetics 201:925–935 
Wang X, Cheng ZM, Zhi S, Xu F (2016) Breeding triploid plants: a review. Czech J Genet Plant  
    Breed 52(2):41–54 
Weber DF (2014) Today’s use of haploids in corn plant breeding. Adv Agron 123:123–144 
Wessels E, Botes WC (2014) Accelerating resistance breeding in wheat by integrating marker-  
    assisted selection and doubled haploid technology. S Afr J Plant Soil 31:35–43 
Xu Q, Yuan XP, Yu HY, Wang YP, Tang SX, Wei XH (2011) Mapping quantitative trait loci for  
    sheath blight resistance in rice using double haploid population. Plant Breed 130(3):404–406 
Yamagishi M (2002) Heterogeneous plastid genomes in anther culture-derived albino rice plants.  
    Euphytica 123(1):67–74 
Yao L, Zhang Y, Liu C, Liu Y, Wang Y, Liang D, Liu J, Sahoo G, Kelliher T (2018) OsMATL muta- 
    tion induces haploid seed formation in indica rice. Nat Plants 4:530–533 

----------------------- Page 456-----------------------

Doubled Haploids in Rice Improvement: Approaches, Applications, and Future Prospects             447 

Yi S, Wu G, Lin Y, Hu N, Liu Z (2015) Characterization of a new type of glyphosate-tolerant  
    5-enolpyruvyl  shikimate-3-phosphate  synthase  from  Isoptericolava  riabilis.  J  Mol  Catal  B  
    Enzym 111:1–8. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.molcatb.2014.11.009 
Zeng YX, Xia LZ, Wen ZH, Ji ZJ, Zeng DL, Qian Q, Yang CD (2015) Mapping-resistant QTLs  
    for rice sheath blight disease with a doubled haploid population. J Integr Agric 14(5):801–810 
Zhang ZH (1989) The practicability of anther culture breeding in rice. In: Advances in plant bio- 
    technology. CIMMYT, IRRI, Mexico, Los Baños, pp 36–37 
Zhang LN, Chu QR (1984) Characteristic and chromosomal variation of somaclones and its prog- 
    eny in rice (Oryza sativa L.). Sci Agric Sin (China) (4):14 
Zheng X, Chen X, Zhang X, Lin Z, Shang J, Xu J, Zhai W, Zhu L (2004) Isolation and identifica- 
    tion of a gene in response to rice blast disease in rice. Plant Mol Biol 54(1):99–109 
Zhu DY, Pan XG (1990) Rice (Oryza sativa L.): guan 18: an improved variety through anther  
    culture. In: Bajaj YPS (ed) Biotechnology in agriculture and forestry 12: rice. Springer, Berlin,  
    pp 204–211 
Zonneveld BJM, Van Iren F (2001) Genome size and pollen viability as taxonomic criteria, appli- 
    cation to the genus Hosta. Plant Biol 3:176–185 

Open Access    This chapter is licensed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution 4.0  
International License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/), which permits use, sharing,  
adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give appropriate  
credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons license and  
indicate if changes were made. 
    The images or other third party material in this chapter are included in the chapter's Creative  
Commons license, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not  
included in the chapter's Creative Commons license and your intended use is not permitted by  
statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from  
the copyright holder. 

----------------------- Page 457-----------------------

Zinc-Biofortified Rice: A Sustainable Food-Based Product for Fighting Zinc  
Malnutrition 

Mark Ian C. Calayugan, B. P. Mallikarjuna Swamy, Chau Thanh Nha,  
Alvin D. Palanog, Partha S. Biswas, Gwen Iris Descalsota-Empleo,  
Yin Myat Myat Min, and Mary Ann Inabangan-Asilo 

Abstract  The lack of dietary diversity among poor communities has led to nutri- 
tional consequences, particularly zinc deficiency. An adequate intake of mineral-  
and vitamin-rich food is necessary for achieving and maintaining good health. Zinc  
is  one  of  the  micronutrients  considered  essential  to  improve  human  health  and  
decrease the risk of malnutrition. Biofortification of rice through breeding is a cost-  
effective   and   sustainable   strategy   to   solve   micronutrient   malnutrition.   The  
Biofortification  Priority  Index  prepared  by  HarvestPlus  clearly  identified  several  
countries in Asia with an immediate need for Zn biofortification. The International  
Rice Research Institute (IRRI) and its national partners in target countries are mak- 
ing  efforts  to  develop  Zn-biofortified  rice  varieties. The  first  set  of  high-Zn  rice  
varieties  has  been  released  for  commercial  cultivation  in  Bangladesh,  India,  the  
Philippines, and Indonesia. Efforts have begun to mainstream grain Zn to ensure  
that the Zn trait becomes an integral part of future varieties. Huge scope exists to  

M. I. C. Calayugan  
International Rice Research Institute, Metro Manila, Philippines  

University of the Philippines, Los Baňos, Laguna, Philippines  

B. P. M. Swamy (*) · M. A. Inabangan-Asilo  
International Rice Research Institute, Metro Manila, Philippines 
e-mail: m.swamy@irri.org  

C. T. Nha  
Cuu Long Delta Rice Research Institute, Cần Thơ, Vietnam  

A. D. Palanog  
International Rice Research Institute, Metro Manila, Philippines  

Philippine Rice Research Institute, Negros Occidental, Philippines  

P. S. Biswas  
Bangladesh Rice Research Institute, Gazipur, Bangladesh  

G. I. Descalsota-Empleo  
University of Southern Mindanao, North Cotabato, Philippines  

Y. M. M. Min  
Department of Agricultural Research, Yezin, Myanmar 

© The Author(s) 2021                                                                          449 
J. Ali, S. H. Wani (eds.), Rice Improvement,  
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-66530-2_13 

----------------------- Page 458-----------------------

450                                                                    M. I. C. Calayugan et al. 

apply advanced genomics technologies such as genomic selection and genome edit- 
ing  to  speed  up  high-Zn  varietal  development. An  efficient  rice  value  chain  for  
Zn-biofortified varieties, quality control, and promotion are essential for successful  
adoption and consumption. The development of next-generation high-Zn rice vari- 
eties with higher grain-Zn content, stacking of multiple nutrients, along with good  
grain quality and acceptable agronomic traits has to be fast-tracked. Healthier rice  
has a large demand from all stakeholders, so we need to keep up the pace of devel- 
oping nutritious rice to meet the demand and to achieve nutritional security. 

Keywords  Rice · Malnutrition · Biofortification · Zinc · QTL · Gene · Bayesian  
analysis 

1     Introduction 

The human body needs micronutrients for proper growth and development and to  
maintain good health (Maret 2017; Palanog et al. 2019). However, deficiencies in  
these elements and associated health risks are commonly reported in all age groups,  
especially in preschool children, women, and elderly people in the developing world  
(Caulfield et al. 2006). An estimated one-third of the global population suffers from  
micronutrient malnutrition, mainly because of the large dependence on cereal sta- 
ples for daily nutritional needs without access to a diversified diet and supplementa- 
tion (Ritchie et al. 2018). The urgent need to address micronutrient malnutrition has  
been widely recognized globally; hence, decreasing childhood mortality and mater- 
nal  death  by  eradicating  malnutrition  is  an  important  Sustainable  Development  
Goal (Hanieh et al. 2020). 
   Among the micronutrients, zinc (Zn) is most essential for vital organs, enzymatic  
activity, tissue growth and development, cognitive function, immunity, etc. There is  
therefore a need for a regular daily supply of Zn in the required quantity to have  
healthy  and  productive  populations  (Prasad  et  al.  2014;  Chasapis  et  al.  2020).  
However, an estimated two billion people suffer from Zn deficiency-related health  
consequences and most of them are resource-poor urban and rural dwellers (Rampa  
et  al.  2020).  The  disability-adjusted  life  years  (DALYs)  due  to  Zn  malnutrition  
strongly  impact  annual  GDP  growth,  and  hamper  economic  development  in  the  
developing world (Gödecke et al. 2018). Multiple interventions such as fortification  
of  foods,  micronutrient  supplementation,  and  food  diversification  have  been  
employed to mitigate Zn malnutrition; however, recurring costs and poor accessibil- 
ity and awareness among the rural masses have resulted in limited success (Bouis  
2017). Increasing the mineral density in the edible part of the major staple crops,  
which is also popularly called “biofortification,” has been proven to be effective in  
alleviating malnutrition without much additional cost. This complementary food-  
based approach is the safest and cheapest way to deliver nutrients on a larger scale  
to the target populations (Bouis and Saltzman 2017). 

----------------------- Page 459-----------------------

Zinc-Biofortified Rice: A Sustainable Food-Based Product for Fighting Zinc Malnutrition    451 

   Rice is among the target staple food crops for Zn biofortification in different  
countries  of  South  Asia,  Southeast  Asia,  and  Africa  (Siwela  et  al.  2020).  The  
Biofortification  Priority  Index  prepared  by  HarvestPlus  clearly  identified  several  
countries in Asia with an immediate need for Zn biofortification (HarvestPlus 2020).  
The International Rice Research Institute (IRRI) and its national partners in target  
countries are making efforts to develop Zn-biofortified rice varieties. The first set of  
high-Zn rice varieties has been released for commercial cultivation in Bangladesh,  
India, the Philippines, and Indonesia (Inabangan-Asilo et al. 2019). Efforts are in  
place to mainstream the breeding of high-Zn rice by applying advanced breeding  
techniques and genomic tools to make sure Zn will be an essential component of all  
future varietal releases from the main breeding pipelines of IRRI (CGIAR 2018). 
   Over the past decade, great progress has been made in our understanding of Zn  
homeostasis in rice from a biofortification perspective and in the development of  
high-Zn rice. In this chapter, we would like to provide some insights into the recent  
advances in developing Zn-biofortified rice for the target countries. 

2     Zn Is Critical for Human Health 

Zinc plays an important role in the catalytic function of most of the enzymes needed  
for  the  structural  stability  and  functioning  of  more  than  3000  proteins,  helps  to  
maintain membrane stability, and protects tissues and cells from oxidative damage  
(Cakmak 2000; Broadley et al. 2007; Andreini et al. 2009; Maret and Li 2009). 
   Zinc deficiency is one of the major causes of child mortality worldwide (Black et al.  
2008),  which  has  been  estimated  to  affect  more  than  178  countries  (WHO  2003).  
Zn-deficient children are highly prone to diarrhea, respiratory ailments, poor cognitive  
function, and stunting (Brooks et al.  2004; Sazawal et al. 2007; Tielsch et al. 2007;  
Young et al.  2014). Zn deficiency during the first 1000 days for children after birth  
causes irreversible damage leading to less chance of survival, poor immune system and  
cognitive ability, and stunting (UNICEF 2013). Hence, a regular daily supply of Zn is  
highly essential, but this is rarely achieved by most resource- poor people. Thus, ade- 
quate Zn nutrition is essential for good health, especially for children and pregnant  
women for growth and development (IZiNCG  2009). The daily Zn requirement of  
individuals varies from 9 to 11 ppm depending on age, gender, and health conditions,  
but preschool children and pregnant and lactating women need more Zn (IOM 2001;  
Welch and Graham 2004; Iqbal et al. 2020; Alqabbani and AlBadr 2020). 

3     Rice Biofortification with High Grain Zn 

Rice is the single most important source of energy and nutrition for more than half  
of the world’s population (Gross and Zhao 2014). It is a major staple crop in more  
than 40 countries and supplies at least 20% of the daily caloric intake of more than  

----------------------- Page 460-----------------------

452                                                                                 M. I. C. Calayugan et al. 

3.5 billion people (FAO 2014). Asia, with 60% of the global population, consumes  
more than 90% of the total rice produced annually (Milovanovic and Smutka 2017).  
Annual per capita rice consumption exceeds 100 kg in some Asian countries (FAO  
2016). However, milled rice is less nutritious; thus, most of the poor people who  
largely depend on rice without access to a mineral-rich diverse diet suffer from hid- 
den hunger, including Zn deficiency. 
    Food-based solutions were found to be safe and effective in controlling and pre- 
venting  micronutrient  deficiencies,  especially  when  multiple  deficiencies  occur  
(Torheim et al. 2010; Szymlek-Gay et al. 2009). Several studies reported that the  
consumption of a diverse diet and crops enriched with mineral elements provides  
more nutrition (Brown et al. 2002; WHO 1998). Recently, biofortification of staple  
crops has become a popular method for tackling malnutrition. It is the process of  
increasing the density of readily bioavailable mineral elements by breeding or bio- 
technological approaches (Garg et al. 2018) for staple food crops such as rice, which  
has  been  obtaining  increased  attention  by  breeders  and  policymakers  in  recent  
times. Biofortification has the lowest per capita costs vis-à-vis other interventions,  
and it is especially easily accessible and affordable for rural populations (Ma et al.  
2008). Therefore, increasing grain-Zn content would create a significant impact on  
human health. One estimate suggested that an additional 8 μg/g of Zn in raw milled  
rice over the baseline Zn (16  μg/g) in cultivated varieties could help to reach the  
amount  equivalent  to  30%  of  the  Estimated  Average  Requirement  per  day  
(HarvestPlus 2012). 

4      Trait Development for High Grain Zn 

4.1      High-Zn Donor Identification  

Rice  is  endowed  with  abundant  genetic  diversity  and  thereby  provides  needed  
genetic variability for rice breeding programs (Rana and Bhat  2004). More than  
230,000 rice accessions are maintained in global gene banks, which include landra- 
ces, cultivars, varieties, and aromatic and wild rice (Li et al. 2014). Among the dif- 
ferent species or subgroups, wild rice, landraces, and aus accessions were found to  
be a rich source of micronutrients; they have several-fold higher nutrients than cul- 
tivated  rice  (Cheng  et  al.  2005;  Banerjee  et  al.  2010;  Descalsota-Empleo  et  al.  
2019a, b). Aus accessions are genetically closer to popularly grown indica rice vari- 
eties, so they can be readily used by breeding programs to improve the Zn content  
of modern rice varieties. Some aus accessions such as Kaliboro, Jamir, UCP122,  
DZ193, and Khao ToT Long 227 have higher content of grain Zn (Norton et al.  
2014; Descalsota et al. 2018). We are efficiently using aus germplasm in our breed- 
ing programs at IRRI and have also widely shared these donor lines with our part- 
ners for use in their breeding programs. The accessions of the 3K Genome Project,  
Multi-parent Advanced  Generation  Inter-Cross  (MAGIC)-derived  lines  and  wild  

----------------------- Page 461-----------------------

Zinc-Biofortified Rice: A Sustainable Food-Based Product for Fighting Zinc Malnutrition                                       453 

rice introgression lines, were also characterized to identify valuable donors for grain  
Zn and used in genetic dissection studies (Bandillo et al. 2013; Swamy et al. 2018a;  
Descalsota et al. 2018; Zaw et al. 2019). Moreover, large scope exists for revisiting  
gene banks to screen for high grain Zn and other beneficial elements using advanced  
high-throughput phenotyping technologies. Similarly, a systematic effort to collect  
and characterize heirloom rice for nutritional value in partner countries will help in  
breeding for improved nutrition. 

4.2       Association Between Yield and Zn  

The development of high-yielding Zn-biofortified rice with a combination of desir- 
able agronomic traits and tolerance of pests and diseases is a must for their success- 
ful adoption and consumption. Both yield and grain Zn are genetically complex  
traits and are hugely influenced by external environmental factors (Zaw et al. 2019;  
Descalsota-Empleo et al. 2019a). In most cases, a negative association was reported  
between grain-Zn content and yield, and in a few specific germplasm accessions  
and  populations  a  nonsignificant  negative  relationship  or  no  relationship  was  
reported (Gregorio  2002; Norton et al. 2010; Morete et al. 2011; Anandan et al.  
2011; Nha 2019). Under different soil Zn conditions and in a set of different aro- 
matic accessions and landraces, a positive relationship between grain Zn and yield  
was  reported  (Wissuwa  et  al.  2008;  Gangashetty  et  al.  2013;  Sathisha  2013).  
Therefore, for the identification of stable high-Zn donor lines with higher or more  
acceptable yield, the use of appropriate breeding methods and selection strategies is  
needed to successfully combine yield and grain Zn. 

4.3        Molecular Dissection of Grain Zn  

4.3.1        QTLs and Meta-QTLs Associated with Grain Zn 

Zn uptake, transport, and accumulation in the grain are governed by a complex net- 
work of quantitative trait loci (QTLs) and genes. A comprehensive review of QTLs  
identified for grain Zn was carried out and detailed discussion presented by Swamy  
et al. (2016). Several QTLs with moderate to high phenotypic variance were reported  
for grain Zn on all 12 chromosomes of rice. At IRRI, our group has also carried out  
several QTL mapping studies using biparental and multiparental populations and  
germplasm  collections  (Table  1).  Swamy  et  al.  (2018a)  reported  eight  QTLs  for  
grain-Zn content. All of these QTLs were distributed across the rice genome, having  
the lowest frequency (one QTL) on chromosomes 1, 9, and 11 and the highest fre- 
quency (seven QTLs) on chromosome 12. Chromosome 7 had the second highest  
number (six) of QTLs. However, the QTLs on chromosomes 7 and 12 were consis- 
tent   over   different   backgrounds   and   environments.   The   QTLs   detected   on  

----------------------- Page 462-----------------------

454                                                                               M. I. C. Calayugan et al. 

Table 1   QTLs identified for grain-Zn content in rice 

                                                                          Additive  
                                                               PVE        effect (mg/ 
 QTL                                         LOD/p value       (%)        kg)             Reference 
 qZn1.1, qZn2.1, qZn3.1, qZn3.2, qZn5.1,     2.5–12.4          3.0–       0.21–6.60       Swamy et al.  
 qZn6.1, qZn8.1, qZn8.2, qZn9.1, qZn10.1,                       36.0                      (2018a) 
 qZn12.1 
 qZn2.1, qZn2.2, qZn3.1, qZn6.1, qZn6.2,     4.3–10.3          7.5–       0.9–2.1         Swamy et al.  
 qZn8.1, qZn11.1, qZn12.1, qZn12.2                              22.8                      (2018b) 
 qZn1.1, qZn2.1, qZn4.1 , qZn6.1, qZn6.2,    0.001–0.0001      9.2–       –               Descalsota et al.  
 qZn7.1, qZn12.1                                               13.75                      (2018) 
 qZn1.1, qZn6.1, qZn12.1, qZn12.2, qZn12.3   0.0000905–        11.9–      –               Descalsota-  
                                             0.00029            17.9                      Empleo et al.  
                                                                                          (2019a) 
 qZn2.1, qZn3.1, qZn5.1, qZn5.2, qZn7.1,     2.77–8.99         8.6–       0.81–2.06       Descalsota-  
 qZn8.1, Zn9.1, qZn11.1                                         27.7                      Empleo et al.  
                                                                                          (2019b) 
 qZn1.1, qZn6.1, qZn6.2                      2.6–3.9           2.9–       0.06–3.2        Dixit et al.  
                                                                34.2                      (2019) 
 qZn , qZn , qZn                             –                 17.57–     –               Zaw et al. (2019) 
     1      5      7 

                                                                20.0 
 qZn1.1, qZn5.1, qZn9.1, qZn12.1             3.14–5.2          8.96–      0.77–0.96       Calayugan et al.  
                                                               15.26                      (2020) 
 Zn1.1, qZn1.2, qZn1.3, Zn2.1, qZn4.1 ,      3.28–15.36        12.60–     2.62–4.73       Jeong et al.  
 qZn5.1, Zn6.1, qZn7.1, qZn9.1, Zn10.1,                        46.80                      (2020) 
 qZn11.1, qZn11.2, Zn11.3, qZn12.1 
 qZn3.1, qZn3.1, qZn4.2                      4.11–9.16         9.89–      0.0001–0.1      Lee et al. (2020) 
                                                               24.56 

PVE phenotypic variance explained 

chromosome 7 contributed 5.3–35.0% of the phenotypic variance for grain-Zn con- 
tent  in  different  backgrounds,  while  the  QTLs  on  chromosome  12  contributed  
9–36% (Swamy et al. 2016, 2018a). In another study, Swamy et al. (2018b) detected  
nine QTLs responsible for Zn on chromosomes 2, 3, 6, 8, 11, and 12 through two  
doubled- haploid (DH) populations derived from crosses of PSBRc82 × Joryeongbyeo  
and PSBRc82 × IR69428. Recently, association mapping experiments using diver- 
sity panels for grain Zn led to the identification of seven QTLs on chromosomes 1,  
2, 4, 6, 7, and 12 by Descalsota et al. (2018) and three QTLs on chromosomes 1, 5,  
and 7 by Zaw et al. (2019). All of these findings show that numerous QTLs for Zn  
highlight the genetic complexity of this trait. 
    Meta-QTL analysis provides consolidated, precise, and smaller confidence inter- 
vals for multiple QTLs reported for a trait (Goffinet and Gerber 2000; Arcade et al.  
2004; Swamy et al. 2011). Jin et al. (2015) identified 22 meta-QTLs on ten different  
chromosomes for grain-Zn content (rMQTLs). Similarly, Raza et al. (2019) carried  
out meta-QTL analysis of grain-Zn QTLs reported from 24 mapping populations  

----------------------- Page 463-----------------------

Zinc-Biofortified Rice: A Sustainable Food-Based Product for Fighting Zinc Malnutrition     455 

and  three  diverse  germplasm  sets  and  identified  46  MQTLs.  Seven  meta-QTLs  
(rMQTL2.1,  rMQTL4.4 ,  rMQTL6.4,  rMQTL8.2,  rMQTL8.3,  rMQTL8.4, and  rMQTL12.4)  
were found to be common between two studies (Jin et al. 2015; Raza et al. 2019). In  
another study, 208 QTLs for grain Zn from 26 studies were projected on the consen- 
sus  map  and  eventually  45  meta-QTLs  were  identified  (Soe  2020).  Overall,  the  
confidence intervals of all the MQTLs were narrower vis-à-vis the mean values of  
the original QTLs. Several consistent QTLs and associated markers were identified,  
which are useful for efficient marker-assisted selection (MAS) programs. In addi- 
tion, precise meta-QTL regions provide an opportunity to shortlist candidate genes  
for further functional validation. 

4.3.2     Network of Metal Homeostasis Genes 

Mapping  of  major-effect  QTLs/genes  for  grain  Zn  and  understanding  their  
molecular basis can fast-track the development of Zn-biofortified rice through  
MAS. The genomic regions of important QTLs associated with grain Zn identi- 
fied in numerous studies contained multiple hypotheticals and functionally anno- 
tated  genes  that  function  as  metal  chelators  and  ion  transporters.  A  list  of  
important genes associated with Zn homeostasis in rice is summarized in Swamy  
et al. (2016). Rice roots produce chemicals that free up mineral elements from  
the soil complex and promote their root uptake from the soil (Widodo et al. 2010;  
Nozoye et al. 2011). Several genes/gene families are involved in biosynthesis of  
phytosiderophores,  mineral  uptake,  transport,  and  loading  such  as  OsDMAS,  
OsSAMS, OsNAS, OsTOM1, and OsNAAT (Inoue et al. 2003, 2008; Bashir et al.  
2006;  Johnson  et  al.  2011).  Zinc  finger  transcription  factors  such  as  OsZIP1,  
OsZIP3, OsZIP4, OsZIP5, and OsZIP9 are major Zn transporters within the rice  
plant (Ramesh et al. 2003; Ishimaru et al. 2005; Lee et al. 2010a, b). In separate  
studies conducted using connected populations, ZIP family genes such as OsZIP5  
and OsZIP9 were identified along with another 140 candidate genes (Nha 2019).  
In a study using DH populations,  OsZIP6 was identified as a primary candidate  
gene  associated  with  grain  Zn  (Calayugan  et  al.  2020).  Similarly,  OsVIT  and  
OsYSL family genes are involved in Zn transport across the tonoplast and phloem,  
respectively  (Sasaki  et  al.  2011;  Kakei  et  al.  2012;  Zhang  et  al.  2012;  Lan  
et al. 2013). 
    The  well-characterized  Zn  metal  homeostasis  genes  can  be  manipulated  
through  genetic  engineering  to  improve  grain-Zn  content  in  rice  (Trijatmiko  
et al.  2016). The advanced genome editing techniques using zinc-finger nucle- 
ases (ZFNs), transcription activator-like effector nucleases (TALENs), and clus- 
tered regularly interspaced short palindromic repeats (CRISPR)/Cas systems can  
be  used  to  induce  modifications  at  specific  genomic  loci  (Kim  et  al.  1996;  
Christian et al. 2010; Jinek et al. 2012; Chen and Gao 2013; Gao 2015). The Zn  
homeostasis genes can be major target sites for genome editing to improve grain- 
Zn content in rice. 

----------------------- Page 464-----------------------

456                                                                       M. I. C. Calayugan et al. 

4.3.3     Bayesian Network Analysis of Grain Yield and Zn 

A  Bayesian  genomic  prediction  network  (BN)  provides  valuable  information  on  
interactions between multiple traits and SNP markers and helps to establish rela- 
tionships among them. It clearly depicts the strength and direction of associations  
among traits and SNP markers. In a way, it helps to validate the QTLs, genes, or trait  
associations identified by genome-wide association analysis (Zaw et al. 2019). In a  
MAGIC Plus population, a BN was used among Zn- and yield-related traits. The  
results  clearly  showed  a  complex  relationship  among  traits  (Fig.  1). Among  the  
agronomic traits studied for their relationship with grain Fe and Zn, only panicle  
length had a direct effect on Fe and Zn content in rice (Descalsota et al. 2018). Zaw  
et al. (2019) conducted BN analysis in a global MAGIC population using 8110 SNP  
markers and 16 traits, including grain Zn. At a BN strength of more than 0.5, strong  
direct associations were reported among traits such as yield  → zinc, zinc  → filled  
grains, iron → zinc, and iron → grain length. Zn was associated with eight markers  
for each of the traits. In general, Fe and Zn content have strong positive correlations,  
thus providing huge opportunities to improve both minerals together. It is interest- 
ing that in both BN studies there was no direct effect of yield on Zn, indicating that  
combining high yield potential and high grain-Zn content is possible in order to  
develop successful Zn-biofortified rice varieties. We emphasize that there is a need  
to thoroughly dissect the influence of panicle length on grain Zn. It is commonly  
observed that increased yield dilutes Zn content, which results in negative correla- 
tions between these traits. There is therefore a need to make adjustments for grain- 
 Zn mapping studies (McDonald et al. 2008). 

Fig. 1   Bayesian network analysis of grain Zn and agronomic traits. Note: Zn zinc, Fe iron, HT  
plant height, DF days to flowering, NT number of tillers, PT productive tillers,  GL grain length,  
GW grain width, TGW thousand-grain weight, YLD grain yield 

----------------------- Page 465-----------------------

Zinc-Biofortified Rice: A Sustainable Food-Based Product for Fighting Zinc Malnutrition                               457 

4.4       Multi-Trait Genomic Selection for Zn Biofortification  

QTL mapping and GWAS methods are routinely used for molecular dissection of  
complex  traits;  however,  they  have  limited  power  in  detecting  minor-effect  loci  
(Bernardo 2008; Collard and Mackill 2008; Ben-Ari and Lavi 2012). In contrast,  
genomic selection (GS) considers genome-wide effects, including both major and  
minor loci, and thereby assesses the genomic estimated breeding values (GEBVs)  
of breeding lines (Meuwissen et al.  2001). With the recent advances in statistics,  
deep machine learning models are helpful in accurately estimating GEBVs and their  
cross-validation in training or reference sets (Montesinos-López et al. 2019). Since  
GS captures total genetic variance, it addresses the existing limitations of GWAS  
and  QTL  mapping  to  improve  traits  (de  los  Campos  et  al.  2009).  In  addition,  it  
speeds up selection cycles, which enhances annual genetic gain and saves cost sig- 
nificantly  (Shamshad  and  Sharma  2018).  Therefore,  great  opportunity  exists  for  
employing GS-related strategies that capture both major- and minor-effect alleles to  
increase the genetic gain for grain yield and grain-Zn content in rice. 
     Selection for higher yield and other desirable agronomic traits along with high  
grain-Zn content is an integral part of Zn biofortification; however, both yield and  
Zn are genetically complex and difficult to manipulate or simultaneously improve  
(Garcia-Oliveira et al. 2018; Zaw et al. 2019). The rate of genetic gain for grain  
yield becomes stagnant at ~1% yearly. This is not sufficient to meet future demand  
for  rice,  not  to  mention  the  strong  impacts  of  complex  genetic  architecture  and  
genotype–environment interactions (Peng et al. 2000, 2004; Wassmann et al. 2009).  
The combined genetic gain for yield and Zn will be relatively inferior when com- 
pared with that for individual traits. Therefore, implementing multi-trait-based pop- 
ulation improvement through genomic selection is an efficient approach. 
     In rice, Spindel et al. (2015) reported prediction accuracies of single-trait genomic  
selection (ST-GS) models for grain yield at 0.31, while Arbelaez et al. (2019) have  
shown predictive accuracies for grain yield at 0.36. Meanwhile, multi- trait genomic  
selection  (MT-GS)  models  have  illustrated  higher  predictive  abilities  than  ST-GS  
models and the results are obvious, especially when low-heritability traits are paired  
with a genetically correlated secondary trait with higher heritability (Jia and Jannink  
2012; Hayashi and Iwata 2013; Guo et al. 2014; Schulthess et al. 2016). Many find- 
ings have used MT-GS approaches in crop breeding, but not yet in rice. Schulthess  
et al. (2016) have confirmed the predictive ability of MT-GS in outperforming ST-GS  
pipelines for grain yield and protein content in rye. Lado et al. (2018) have verified  
combining two, three, and four traits in bread wheat in exploiting the benefits of  
MT-GS  under  different  cross-validation  scenarios.  The  use  of  correlated  traits  in  
MT-GS models gives the best prediction accuracies in a two- trait scenario. GS in  
maize showed higher prediction accuracy in DH populations than a GWAS panel  
using the same set of GBS and rAmpSeq markers, and GS outperformed MAS in  
predicting the performance of Zn content in maize (Guo et al. 2020). Although most  
of the available GS methods increased predictive ability, Zn breeders should target  
multiple  independent  phenotypes  from  multi-environments.  Thus,  multi-trait  and  

----------------------- Page 466-----------------------

458                                                                                       M. I. C. Calayugan et al. 

multi-environment (MTME) models have been established to employ the informa- 
tion on multiple traits evaluated in multiple environments, which improves predictive  
ability     compared         to    conventional,         pedigree,       and     independent          GS     analysis  
(Montesinos-Lopez et al. 2016). 

5       Development of High-Zn Rice 

5.1       Phenotyping of Grain Zn  

To enhance selection accuracy and to significantly improve a breeding program,  
reliable phenotyping is crucial. Accurate phenotyping for any trait involves a stan- 
dard protocol with a set of specific standards. Usually in large biofortification breed- 
ing programs like the one at IRRI, we handle a huge number of breeding lines every  
season, so there is a need for quick turnover of materials with accurate phenotyping  
for  grain  Zn.  Efficient  high-throughput  dehulling,  milling,  and  Zn  measurement  
protocols and equipment are needed for successful Zn biofortification of rice (Fig. 2)  
(Swamy et al. 2016; Guild et al. 2017). Several low-throughput qualitative, semi-  
quantitative, and quantitative methods are available for the estimation of grain-Zn  
content in rice and other cereals. Inductively coupled plasma optical emission spec- 
trometry  (ICP-OES)  is  used  to  assess  nutrient  density  in  grains  (Zarcinas  et  al.  
1987); this method is more accurate but low-throughput and input-intensive and it  
requires  trained  staff.  X-ray  fluorescence  (XRF)  is  a  rapid  non-chemical-based  

Fig. 2   Phenotyping for grain-Zn milled rice 

----------------------- Page 467-----------------------

Zinc-Biofortified Rice: A Sustainable Food-Based Product for Fighting Zinc Malnutrition    459 

method to measure grain-Zn content in milled rice, which has decreased cost per  
unit and simultaneously increased selection intensity although it still requires grain  
processing under a contamination-free environment of exogenous Zn sources. 

5.2      Setting a Zn Target for Rice Biofortification 

The development of nutritional targets for crops for biofortification breeding was  
established by a group of experts taking into account the food habits of the target  
populations,  nutrient  losses  during  food  processing,  and  nutrient  bioavailability  
(Hotz and McClafferty 2007). The breeding target was designed to meet the specific  
nutrient requirement of the target populations considering the baseline micronutri- 
ents existing in popular rice varieties and extra micronutrient content to be added to  
the crop of interest. Zn-biofortified rice is expected to provide >40% of the Estimated  
Average Requirement, which is enough to help overcome Zn-deficiency-induced  
health risks (Bouis and Saltzman 2017). There is a plan to release high-Zn rice vari- 
eties in three phases: the first set of varieties will have an additional Zn content of  
6–8 ppm, the second wave of varieties will have 8–12 ppm, while the third wave of  
high-Zn rice varieties will have 12 ppm of additional grain Zn (Fig. 3). 

5.3      Germplasm Enhancement and Pre-breeding for Grain Zn 

Exploitable genetic variability for any trait, its systematic characterization, and effi- 
cient use are essential for a successful breeding program. Most elite modern rice  
varieties and their closest elite genetic pool have low grain-Zn content (Gregorio  
2002).  Oryza nivara,  O. rufipogon,  O. longistaminata, and  O. barthii accessions,  
landraces, colored rice, and aus and aromatic accessions were found to have rich  
grain-Zn content (Swamy et al.  2016, 2018a, b; Ishikawa et al. 2017). But these  
accessions may not be agronomically desirable because of their poor phenotype and  
lower yield. Therefore, a systematic pre-breeding for grain Zn is essential to develop  
high-Zn rice varieties. 
   The  advanced  backcross  method  for  genetic  dissection  of  wild  rice,  and  for  
developing high-Zn introgression lines, is an attractive approach for efficient use  
of wild rice accessions (Balakrishnan et al. 2020). Several wild rice-derived intro- 
gression lines with high grain Zn and yield have already been developed by several  
groups (Ishikawa et al.  2017; Swamy et al. 2018a). Multi-parent-derived popula- 
tions  to  select  transgressive  variants  with  a  combination  of  desirable  traits  have  
yielded  many  desirable  transgressive  variants  for  grain  Zn  (Gande  et  al.  2013;  
Ishikawa  et  al.  2017;  Descalsota-Empleo  et  al.  2019a,  b).  Marker-assisted  QTL  
deployment, QTL pyramiding, and marker-assisted recurrent selection are helpful  
in germplasm enhancement for grain Zn with other traits (Hill et al.  2008; Boyle  
et al. 2017). 

----------------------- Page 468-----------------------

460                                                                                            M. I. C. Calayugan et al. 

Fig. 3   Zn target set for breeding Zn-biofortified rice varieties 

     Several studies have characterized germplasm and advanced breeding lines  
for grain-Zn content (Gregorio et al.  2000; Brar et al. 2011). Garcia-Oliveira  
et al. (2009) identified 85 introgression lines with the highest quantities of Zn  
with a mean value of 27.1 ppm. Martínez et al. (2010) phenotyped grain-Zn  
content in 11,400 rice samples in both brown rice and milled rice and reported  
corresponding Zn values of 20–25 ppm and 16–17 ppm, respectively. Gande  
et   al.   (2013)   identified   eight   transgressive   lines   for   high   Zn   content  
(31.2–35.5 ppm). Some of these introgression lines, transgressive segregants,  
and breeding lines can be used as donor lines for Zn biofortification and even  
some can be directly tested and released as high-Zn rice varieties for commer- 
cial cultivation. 

5.4       Mainstreaming of Zn Biofortification  

Zinc-biofortified rice varieties have been successfully released for cultivation by  
farmers in some of the target countries. However, developing, releasing, and dis- 
seminating a few varieties may not create sustainable and wide-scale impact on  
human health. At IRRI, mainstream breeding programs are shifting from a siloed  
trait-based breeding approach to a modernized product development pipeline that  
effectively integrates the improvement of all traits necessary for market accep- 
tance into a single variety replacement strategy. This new strategy involves using  
population improvement as a mechanism to drive genetic gain for complex traits,  
while simultaneously increasing the frequency of trait-favorable alleles. Essential  
to  this  strategy  is  the  data-driven  identification  of  a  core  set  of  elite  lines  that  

----------------------- Page 469-----------------------

Zinc-Biofortified Rice: A Sustainable Food-Based Product for Fighting Zinc Malnutrition  461 

represent the pool of possible parental lines that can be used in the breeding pro- 
cess (Cobb et al. 2019). Through successive cycles of recurrent selection, main- 
stream breeding efforts are now able to drive genetic gain and improve the average  
value of all traits from a product profile in the entire elite gene pool simultane- 
ously  (Collard  et  al.  2017).  By  integrating  selection  for  high  grain-Zn  content  
directly into the mainstream breeding effort, the mean value of grain Zn among  
the elite breeding lines will eventually be at or above the recommended allowance  
of 28 ppm in milled grains. Once this occurs, all the most recently developed new  
varieties  released  from  the  mainstream  breeding  program  will  have  acceptable  
concentrations of Zn in addition to other traits more valued in the marketplace.  
With  minimal  effort,  maintenance  breeding  for  Zn  can  be  conducted  in  elite  
breeding programs once acceptable grain-Zn content is achieved in order to ensure  
constant delivery of sufficient Zn to the diets of nutrition-vulnerable rice-consum- 
ing populations. Incumbent upon this strategy is the need for sufficient variation  
to drive genetic gain for complex traits. A three-phased approach is suggested:  
elite  germplasm  characterization,  elite  germplasm  enhancement  and  selection,  
and mainstream breeding. 

6     High-Zn Rice Testing and Release 

6.1     Genotype × Environment Effects on Grain Zn 

Grain-Zn  content  is  a  complex  trait  found  to  be  significantly  influenced  by  
external soil and climatic factors (Chandel et al.  2010; Anuradha et al. 2012;  
Swamy et al. 2016; Naik et al. 2020). Meteorological factors such as tempera- 
ture, relative humidity, and rainfall; soil factors such as organic matter, pH, and  
nutrient status; and agronomic practices such as fertilizer application, tilling,  
cultivation system, and irrigation (White and Broadley 2009; Joshi et al. 2010;  
Chandel et al. 2010) need to be taken into account. Grain-Zn content in a study  
conducted by Wissuwa et al. (2008) was found to be greatly influenced by the  
native Zn in soils, genotype, and Zn fertilizer application. In a separate study by  
Wang et al. (2014), water management with alternate wetting and drying (AWD)  
together with ZnSO  fertilization showed a positive response for higher yield 4 
coupled with higher grain-Zn content in rice. Pandian et al. (2011) conducted  
field  experiments  across  three  locations  involving  17  genotypes  of  rice.  The  
results showed that grain-Zn content varied significantly among the genotypes  
and locations. 
   Thus, G × E testing is needed to evaluate promising germplasm and the stability  
of  mineral  accumulation  across  generations  and  at  multiple  test  sites  (Gregorio  
2002; Wissuwa et al. 2008; Impa et al. 2013; Naik et al. 2020). Hence, the stability  
of Zn-biofortified genotypes for grain-Zn content in addition to grain yield is essen- 
tial for commercial release as varieties. 

----------------------- Page 470-----------------------

462                                                                                                          M. I. C. Calayugan et al. 

6.2         Zn-Biofortified Rice Varieties Released   
            in Different Countries 

Breeding efforts to biofortify rice with high grain Zn have resulted in the successful  
release of several high-Zn rice varieties in several countries of Asia. Five high-Zn rice  
varieties  (BRRI  dhan62,  BRRI  dhan64,  BRRI  dhan72,  BRRI  dhan74,  and  BRRI  
dhan84) have been released for cultivation in Bangladesh. In India, two high- Zn rice  
varieties (DRR Dhan45 and Chhattisgarh Zinc Rice-1) are available for farmers and  
consumers. Similarly, NSIC Rc 460 and Inapari Nutri Zn have been released for farm- 
ers’ cultivation in the Philippines and Indonesia, respectively. All these high-Zn rice  
varieties have higher grain-Zn content along with desirable agronomic traits and toler- 
ance of biotic and abiotic stresses (Swamy et al. 2016; Tsakirpaloglou et al. 2019).  
Several  promising  high-Zn  lines  have  been  successfully  tested  in  Myanmar  and  
Cambodia and in some African countries. We are also making efforts to develop the  
next wave of Zn-biofortified rice varieties with higher grain-Zn content. 

6.3         High-Zn Rice Traceability and Product Control  

Grain-Zn content in rice is an invisible nutritional trait and no morphological indicators  
differentiate Zn-biofortified rice from market rice. Maintaining the product integrity of  
high-Zn rice throughout the value chain is an important component of successful Zn  
biofortification programs. Close monitoring, supervision, and quality control are nec- 
essary with proper certification, labeling, branding, and tracing of the product (www. 
fao.org/tempref/codex/Meetings/CCNFSDU/ccnfsdu36/nf36_11e.pdf).  The  develop- 
ment of Zn product-specific molecular marker-based fingerprints and rapid qualitative  
biochemical marker kits will also help in tracing Zn-rich rice. Blockchain technology  
is being used in the large-scale dissemination of nutritious crops to ensure quality con- 
trol and to deliver the right products to consumers (Tripoli and Schmidhuber 2018). 

7        Next-Generation Multi-Nutrient Rice Varieties 

Breeding for rice varieties with multiple beneficial minerals and vitamins is essen- 
tial to develop them holistically for one biofortified rice product. Efforts to develop  
rice varieties with high Zn, high Fe, selenium, vitamin A, proteins, amino acids,  
etc., should be given a priority. It will also be interesting to combine high nutrient  
content with traits beneficial to health, such as low glycemic index, antioxidants,  
and resistance starch. Also, there is a need to diminish the amount of harmful ele- 
ments such as arsenic and cadmium. The increase in demand for rice varieties with  
improved grain quality and nutrition means that a suite of rice varieties with differ- 
ent combinations of traits targeted to different regions should be developed. 

----------------------- Page 471-----------------------

Zinc-Biofortified Rice: A Sustainable Food-Based Product for Fighting Zinc Malnutrition               463 

8      Conclusions 

Biofortification of rice with improved Zn content is an efficient means to tackle Zn  
malnutrition in predominantly rice-consuming developing countries. Some success  
has been achieved in understanding the molecular basis of Zn accumulation and the  
effects of G × E, and finally in developing and releasing Zn-biofortified rice variet- 
ies for the target countries. In all, ten high-Zn rice varieties have been released in  
four Asian countries. Efforts have begun to mainstream grain Zn to ensure that the  
Zn trait becomes an integral part of future varieties. Huge scope exists to apply  
advanced genomics technologies such as genomic selection and genome editing to  
speed   up   high-Zn   varietal   development.   An   efficient   rice   value   chain   for  
Zn-biofortified varieties, quality control, and promotion are essential for successful  
adoption and consumption. The development of next-generation high-Zn rice vari- 
eties with higher grain-Zn content, stacking of multiple nutrients, along with good  
grain quality and acceptable agronomic traits has to be fast-tracked. Healthier rice  
has a large demand from all stakeholders, so we need to keep up the pace of devel- 
oping nutritious rice to meet the demand and to achieve nutritional security. 

References 

Alqabbani  H,  AlBadr  N  (2020)  Zinc  status  (intake  and  level)  of  healthy  elderly  individuals  
    in  Riyadh  and  its  relationship  to  physical  health  and  cognitive  impairment.  Clin  Nutr  Exp  
    29:10–17. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.yclnex.2019.12.001 
Anandan A, Rajiv G, Eswaran R, Prakash M (2011) Genotypic variation and relationships between  
    quality traits and trace elements in traditional and improved rice (Oryza sativa L.) genotypes.  
    J Food Sci 76(4):122–130 
Andreini C, Bertini I, Rosato A (2009) Metalloproteomes: a bioinformatic approach. Acc Chem  
    Res 42:1471–1479 
Anuradha K, Agarwal S, Batchu AK, Babu AP, Swamy BPM, Longva T, Sarla N (2012) Evaluating  
    rice germplasm for iron and zinc concentration in brown rice and seed dimensions. J Geophys  
    Res 4:19–25 
Arbelaez JD, Dwiyanti MS, Tandayu E et al (2019) 1k-RiCA (1K-Rice Custom Amplicon) a novel  
    genotyping  amplicon-based  SNP  assay  for  genetics  and  breeding  applications  in  rice.  Rice  
    12:55. https://doi.org/10.1186/s12284- 019- 0311- 0 
Arcade  A,  Labourdette  A,  Falque  M,  Mangin  B,  Chardon  F,  Charcosset  A,  Joets  J  (2004)  
    BioMercator:  integrating  genetic  maps  and  QTL  towards  discovery  of  candidate  genes.  
    Bioinformatics 20(14):2324–2326 
Balakrishnan D, Surapaneni M, Yadavalli VR, Addanki KR, Mesapogu S, Beerelli K, Neelamraju  
    S (2020) Detecting CSSLs and yield QTLs with additive, epistatic and QTL × environment  
    interaction  effects  from  Oryza  sativa  ×  O.  nivara  IRGC81832  cross.  Sci  Rep  10(1):1–18.  
    https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598- 020- 64300- 0 
Bandillo N, Raghava C, Muyco PA, Sevilla MAL, Lobina IT, Dilla-Ermita CJ, Tung CW, McCouch  
    S, Thomson M, Mauleon R, Singh RK, Gregorio G, Redoña E, Leung H (2013) Multi-parent  
    advanced generation inter-cross (MAGIC) populations in rice: progress and potential for genet- 
    ics research and breeding. Rice 6:11 
Banerjee  S,  Sharma  DJ,  Verulkar  SB,  Chandel  G  (2010)  Use  of  in  silico  and  semi  quantita- 
    tive RT-PCR approaches to develop nutrient rich rice (Oryza sativa L). Indian J Biotechnol  
    9:203–212 

----------------------- Page 472-----------------------

464                                                                             M. I. C. Calayugan et al. 

Bashir K, Inoue H, Nagasaka S, Takahashi M, Nakanishi H, Mori S, Nishizawa NK (2006) Cloning  
    and characterization of deoxymugineic acid synthase genes from graminaceous plants. J Biol  
    Chem 281:32395–32402 
Ben-Ari G, Lavi U (2012) Marker assisted selection in plant breeding. In: Plant biotechnology and  
    agriculture. Academic Press, Cambridge, pp 163–184 
Bernardo R (2008) Molecular markers and selection for complex traits in plants: learning from the  
    last 20 years. Crop Sci 48:1649 
Black RE, Allen LH, Bhutta ZA, Caulfield LE, de Onis M, Ezzati M, Mathers C, Rivera J (2008)  
    Maternal and child undernutrition: global and regional exposures and health consequences.  
    Lancet 371:243–260 
Bouis  H  (2017) An  overview  of  the  landscape  and  approach  for  biofortification  in Africa. Afr  
    J Food Agric Nutr Dev 17(2):11848–11864. https://doi.org/10.18697/ajfand.78.harvestplus01 
Bouis H, Saltzman A (2017) Improving nutrition through biofortification: a review of evidence  
    from HarvestPlus, 2003 through 2016. Glob Food Secur 12:49–58. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
    gfs.2017.01.009 
Boyle EA, Li YI, Pritchard JK (2017) An expanded view of complex traits: from polygenic to  
    omnigenic. Cell 169:1177–1186. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2017.05.038 
Brar B, Jain S, Singh R, Jain RK (2011) Genetic diversity for iron and zinc contents in a collection  
    of 220 rice (Oryza sativa L.) genotypes. Indian J Genet Plant Breed 71(1):67–73 
Broadley  MR,  White  PJ,  Hammond  JP,  Zelko  I,  Lux  A  (2007)  Zinc  in  plants.  New  Phytol  
    173:677–702 
Brooks WA, Yunus M, Santosham M et al (2004) Zinc for severe pneumonia in very young chil- 
    dren: double-blind placebo-controlled trial. Lancet 363:1683–1688 
Brown  KH,  Peerson  JM,  Kimmons  JE,  Hotz  C  (2002)  Options  for  achieving  adequate  intake  
    from home-prepared complementary foods in low income countries. In: Black RE, Fliescher  
    Michaelson K (eds) Public health issues in infant and child nutrition. Nestle nutrition workshop  
    series. Pediatric program, vol 48. Lippincott Williams and Wilkins; Nestec Ltd, Philadelphia,  
    PA; Vevey, pp 239–256 
Cakmak I (2000) Role of zinc in protecting plant cells from reactive oxygen species. New Phytol  
    146:185–205 
Calayugan MIC, Formantes AK, Amparado A, Descalsota-Empleo GI, Nha CT, Inabangan-Asilo  
    MA et al (2020) Genetic analysis of agronomic traits and grain iron and zinc concentrations  
    in  a  doubled  haploid  population  of  rice  (Oryza  sativa  L.).  Sci  Rep  10(1):2283.  https://doi. 
    org/10.1038/s41598- 020- 59184- z 
Caulfield LE, Richard SA, Rivera JA et al (2006) Stunting, wasting, and micronutrient deficiency  
    disorders. In: Jamison DT, Breman JG, Measham AR et al (eds) Disease control priorities in  
    developing countries, 2nd edn. The International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/ 
    The   World    Bank,   Washington,     DC.    Chapter    28.  https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/ 
    NBK11761/. Co-published by Oxford University Press, New York 
CGIAR (2018) 3-year system business plan companion document. CGIAR five-year biofortifica- 
    tion strategy 2019-2023. CGIAR, Montpellier 
Chandel  G,  Banerjee  S,  See  S,  Meena  R,  Sharma  DJ, Verulkar  SB  (2010)  Effects  of  different  
    nitrogen fertilizer levels and native soil properties on rice grain Fe, Zn and protein contents.  
    Rice Sci 17:213–227 
Chasapis C, Ntoupa P, Spiliopoulou C, Stefanidou M (2020) Recent aspects of the effects of zinc  
    on human health. Arch Toxicol 94(5):1443–1460. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00204- 020- 02702- 9 
Chen K, Gao C (2013) Targeted genome modification technologies and their applications in crop  
    improvements. Plant Cell Rep 33:575–583 
Cheng  ZQ,  Huang  XQ,  Zhang YZ,  Qian  J  (2005)  Diversity  in  the  content  of  some  nutritional  
    components in husked seeds of three wild rice species and rice varieties in Yunnan Province of  
    China. J Integr Plant Biol l47:1260–1270 
Christian M, Cermak T, Doyle EL, Schmidt C, Zhang F, Hummel A et al (2010) Targeting DNA  
    double-strand breaks with TAL effector nucleases. Genetics 186:757–761 

----------------------- Page 473-----------------------

Zinc-Biofortified Rice: A Sustainable Food-Based Product for Fighting Zinc Malnutrition            465 

Cobb JN, Juma RU, Biswas PS, Arbalaez JD, Rutkoski J, Atlin G, Hagen T, Quinn M, Ng EH (2019)  
    Enhancing the rate of genetic gain in public-sector plant breeding programs: lessons from the  
    breeder’s equation. Theor Appl Genet 132:627. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00122- 019- 03317- 0 
Collard BC, Mackill DJ (2008) Marker-assisted selection: an approach for precision plant breeding  
    in the twenty-first century. Philos Trans R Soc Lond Ser B Biol Sci 363:557–572 
Collard  BCY,  Beredo  JC,  Lenaerts  B,  Mendoza  R,  Santelice  R,  Lopena  V,  Verdeprado  H,  
    Raghavan C, Gregorio GB, Vial L, Demomt M, Biswas PS, Iftkhauddaula KM, Rahman MA,  
    Cobb JN, Islam MA (2017) Revisiting rice breeding methods: evaluating the use of rapid gen- 
    eration advance (RGA) for routine rice breeding. Plant Prod Sci 20:1. https://doi.org/10.108 
    0/1343943X.2017.1391705 
Descalsota GIL, Swamy BPM, Zaw H, Inabangan-Asilo MA, Amparado A, Mauleon R et al (2018)  
    Genome-wide association mapping in a rice MAGIC Plus population detects QTLs and genes  
    useful for biofortification. Front Plant Sci 9:1–20. https://doi.org/10.3389/fpls.2018.01347 
Descalsota-Empleo GI, Noraziyah AAS, Navea IP, Chung C, Dwiyanti MS, Labios RJD, Ikmal  
    AM, Juanillas VM, Inabangan-Asilo MA, Amparado A, Reinke R, Vera Cruz CM, Chin JH,  
    Swamy BPM (2019a) Genetic dissection of grain nutritional traits and leaf blight resistance in  
    rice. Genes 10:30. https://doi.org/10.3390/genes10010030 
Descalsota-Empleo  GI, Amparado A,  Inabangan-Asilo  MA, Tesoro  F,  Stangoulis  J,  Reinke  R,  
    Swamy BPM (2019b) Genetic mapping of QTL for agronomic traits and grain mineral ele- 
    ments in rice. Crop J 7(4):560–572. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cj.2019.03.002 
Dixit S, Singh UM, Abbai R, Ram T, Singh VK, Paul A, Virk PS, Kumar A (2019) Identification  
    of genomic region(s) responsible for high iron and zinc content in rice. Sci Rep 9:8136. https:// 
    doi.org/10.1038/s41598- 019- 43888- y 
FAO (Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations) (2014) Country nutrition paper  
    Bangladesh. In: International Conference on Nutrition, 19–21 November 2014. FAO, Rome 
FAO (Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations) (2016) Statistical database. FAO,  
    Rome. http://faostat3.fao.org/home/E 
Gande  NK,  Rakhi  S,  Kundur  PJ, Amabti  R,  Bekele  BD,  Shashidhar  HE  (2013)  Evaluation  of  
    recombinant inbred lines of rice (Oryza sativa L.) for grain zinc content, yield related traits  
    and identification of transgressant lines grown under aerobic conditions. Asian J Exp Biol Sci  
    4(4):567–574 
Gangashetty  PI,  Salimath  PM,  Hanamaratt  NG  (2013)  Genetic  variability  studies  in  geneti- 
    cally  diverse  non-basmati  local  aromatic  genotypes  of  rice  (Oryza  sativa  L.).  Rice  Genom  
    Genet 4:4–8 
Gao C (2015) Genome editing in crops: from bench to field. Natl Sci Rev 2:13–15 
Garcia-Oliveira AL, Tan L, Fu Y, Sun C (2009) Genetic identification of quantitative trait loci for  
    contents of mineral nutrients in rice grain. J Integr Plant Biol 51:84–92 
Garcia-Oliveira AL, Chander S, Ortiz R, Menkir A, Gedil M (2018) Genetic basis and breeding  
    perspectives of grain iron and zinc enrichment in cereals. Front Plant Sci 9:1–13. https://doi. 
    org/10.3389/fpls.2018.00937 
Garg M, Sharma N, Sharma S, Kapoor P, Kumar A, Chunduri V, Arora P (2018) Biofortified crops  
    generated by breeding, agronomy, and transgenic approaches are improving lives of millions of  
    people around the world. Front Nutr 5:12. https://doi.org/10.3389/fnut.2018.00012 
Gödecke T, Stein AJ, Qaim M (2018) The global burden of chronic and hidden hunger: trends and  
    determinants. Glob Food Secur 17:21–29. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.gfs.2018.03.004 
Goffinet B, Gerber S (2000) Quantitative trait loci: a meta-analysis. Genetics 155(1):463–473 
Gregorio GB (2002) Progress in breeding for trace minerals in staple crops. J Nutr 132:500–502 
Gregorio GB, Senadhira D, Htut T, Graham RD (2000) Breeding for trace mineral density in rice.  
    Food Nutr Bull 21:382–386 
Gross BL, Zhao Z (2014) Archaeological and genetic insights into the origins of domesticated rice.  
    Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 111(17):6190 
Guild GE, Paltridge NG, Andersson MS, Stangoulis JCR (2017) An energy-dispersive X-ray fluo- 
    rescence method for analysing Fe and Zn in common bean, maize and cowpea biofortification  
    programs. Plant Soil 419(1–2):457–466. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11104- 017- 3352- 4 

----------------------- Page 474-----------------------

466                                                                                 M. I. C. Calayugan et al. 

Guo G, Zhao F, Wang Y, Zhang Y, Du L, Su G (2014) Comparison of single-trait and multiple-trait  
    genomic prediction models. BMC Genet 15:30–36 
Guo R, Dhliwayo T, Mageto EK, Palacios-Rojas N, Lee M, Yu D, Ruan Y, Zhang A, San Vicente  
    F, Olsen M, Crossa J, Prasanna BM, Zhang L, Zhang X (2020) Genomic prediction of ker- 
    nel  zinc  concentration  in  multiple  maize  populations  using  genotyping-by-sequencing  and  
    repeat  amplification  sequencing  markers.  Front  Plant  Sci  11:1–15.  https://doi.org/10.3389/ 
    fpls.2020.00534 
Hanieh S, High H, Boulton J (2020) Nutrition justice: uncovering invisible pathways to malnutri- 
    tion. Front Endocrinol 11:150. https://doi.org/10.3389/fendo.2020.00150 
HarvestPlus  (2012)  International  Rice  Research  Institute.  http://www.harvestplus.org/content/ 
    zinc- rice- india 
HarvestPlus (2020). https://www.harvestplus.org/knowledge- market/BPI. Accessed 20 Jun 2020 
Hayashi T, Iwata H (2013) A Bayesian method and its variational approximation for prediction of  
    genomic breeding values in multiple traits. BMC Bioinformatics 14:34 
Hill WG, Michael E, Goddard ME, Visscher PM (2008) Data and theory point to mainly additive  
    genetic variance for complex traits. PLoS Genet 4:e1000008. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal. 
    pgen.1000008 
Hotz C, McClafferty B (2007) From harvest to health: challenges for developing biofortified staple  
    foods and determining their impact on micronutrient status. Food Nutr Bull 28(2):271–279 
Impa SM, Morete MJ, Ismail AM, Schulin R, Johnson-Beebout SE (2013) Zn uptake translocation  
    and grain Zn loading in rice (Oryza sativa L) genotypes selected for Zn-deficiency tolerance  
    and high grain Zn. J Exp Bot 64:2739–2751 
Inabangan-Asilo MA, Mallikarjuna Swamy BP, Amparado AF, Descalsota-Empleo GIL, Arocena  
    EC, Reinke R (2019) Stability and G × E analysis of zinc-biofortified rice genotypes evaluated  
    in diverse environments. Euphytica 215(3):1–17. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10681- 019- 2384- 7 
Inoue H, Higuchi K, Takahashi M, Nakanishi H, Mori S, Nishizawa NK (2003) Three rice nico- 
    tianamine synthase genes,  OsNAS1, OsNAS2, and OsNAS3 are expressed in cells involved in  
    long-distance transport of iron and differentially regulated by iron. Plant J 36:366–381 
Inoue  H,  Takahashi  M,  Kobayashi  T,  Suzuki  M,  Nakanishi  H,  Mori  S,  Nishizawa  NK  (2008)  
    Identification  and  localisation  of  the  rice  nicotianamine  aminotransferase  gene  OsNAAT1  
    expression suggests the site of phytosiderophore synthesis in rice. Plant Mol Biol 66:193–203 
IOM (Institute of Medicine) (2001) Dietary reference intakes for vitamin A, vitamin K, arsenic,  
    boron, chromium, copper, iodine, iron, manganese, molybdenum, nickel, silicon, vanadium,  
    and zinc. National Academy Press, Washington, DC 
Iqbal S, Ali I, Rust P, Kundi M, Ekmekcioglu C (2020) Selenium, zinc, and manganese status in  
    pregnant  women  and  its  relation  to  maternal  and  child  complications.  Nutrients  12(3):725.  
    https://doi.org/10.3390/nu12030725 
Ishikawa R, Iwata M, Taniko K, Monden G, Miyazaki N, Orn C et al (2017) Detection of quantita- 
    tive trait loci controlling grain zinc concentration using Australian wild rice, Oryza meridiona- 
    lis, a potential genetic resource for biofortification of rice. PLoS One 12(10):e0187224. https:// 
    doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0187224 
Ishimaru Y, Suzuki M, Kobayashi T, Takahashi M, Nakanishi H, Mori S, Nishizawa NK (2005)  
    OsZIP4, a novel zinc-regulated zinc transporter in rice. J Exp Bot 56:3207–3214 
IZiNCG  (International  Zinc  Nutrition  Consultative  Group)  (2009)  Systematic  reviews  of  zinc  
    intervention strategies. Food Nutr Bull 25:S12–S40 
Jeong O-Y, Lee J-H, Jeong E-G et al (2020) Analysis of QTL responsible for grain iron and zinc  
    content in doubled haploid lines of rice (Oryza sativa) derived from an intra-japonica cross.  
    Plant Breed 139:344–355. https://doi.org/10.1111/pbr.12787 
Jia Y, Jannink JL (2012) Multiple-trait genomic selection methods increase genetic value predic- 
    tion accuracy. Genetics 192:1513–1522 
Jin  T,  Chen  J,  Zhu  L,  Zhao Y,  Guo  J,  Huang Y  (2015)  Comparative  mapping  combined  with  
    homology- based cloning of the rice genome reveals candidate genes for grain zinc and iron  
    concentration in maize. BMC Genet 16(1):17 
Jinek M, Chylinski K, Fonfara I, Hauer M, Doudna JA, Charpentier E (2012) A programmable  
    dual-RNA-guided DNA endonuclease in adaptive bacterial immunity. Science 337:816–821 

----------------------- Page 475-----------------------

Zinc-Biofortified Rice: A Sustainable Food-Based Product for Fighting Zinc Malnutrition                  467 

Johnson AAT, Kyriacou B, Callahan DL, Carruthers L, Stangoulis J (2011) Constitutive overex- 
    pression of the  OsNAS gene family reveals single-gene strategies for effective iron- and zinc-  
    biofortification of rice endosperm. PLoS One 6:e24476 
Joshi AK, Crossa J, Arun B, Chand R, Trethowan R, Vargas M, Monasterio IO (2010) Genotype  
    × environment interaction for zinc and iron concentration of wheat grain in eastern Gangetic  
    plains of India. Field Crops Res 116:268. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fcr.2010.01.004 
Kakei Y, Ishimaru Y, Kobayashi T, Yamakawa T, Nakanshi H, Nishizawa NK (2012) OsYSL16  
    plays a role in the allocation of iron. Plant Mol Biol 79:583–594 
Kim YG, Cha J, Chandrasegaran S (1996) Hybrid restriction enzymes: zinc finger fusions to Fok I  
    cleavage domain. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 93:1156–1160 
Lado B, Vázquez D, Quincke M, Silva P, Aguilar I, Gutiérrez L (2018) Resource allocation opti- 
    mization with multi-trait genomic prediction for bread wheat (Triticum aestivum L.) baking  
    quality. Theor Appl Genet 131:2719. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00122- 018- 3186- 3 
Lan HX, Wang ZF, Wang QH, Wang MM, Bao YM, Huang J, Zhang HS (2013) Characterization  
    of a vacuolar zinc transporter OZT1 in rice (Oryza sativa L.). Mol Biol Rep 40(2):1201–1210 
Lee S, Jeong HJ, Kim SA, Lee J, Guerinot ML, An G (2010a) OsZIP5 is a plasma membrane zinc  
    transporter in rice. Plant Mol Biol 73(4–5):507–517 
Lee S, Kim SA, Lee J, Guerinot ML, An G (2010b) Zinc deficiency-inducible OsZIP8 encodes a  
    plasma membrane-localized zinc transporter in rice. Mol Cell 29(6):551–558 
Lee S-M, Kang J-W, Lee J-Y, Seo J, Shin D, Cho J-H, Jo S, Song Y-C, Park D-S, Ko J-M, Koh H-J,  
    Lee J-H (2020) QTL analysis for Fe and Zn concentrations in rice grains using a doubled hap- 
    loid population derived from a cross between rice (Oryza sativa) cultivar 93-11 and milyang  
    352. Plant Breed Biotech 8(1):69–76 
Li J, Wang J, Zeigler RS (2014) The 3,000 rice genomes project: new opportunities and challenges  
    for future rice research. Giga Sci 3:8 
de los Campos G, Naya H, Gianola D, Crossa J, Legarra A, Manfredi E, Weigel K, Cotes JM  
    (2009) Predicting quantitative traits with regression models for dense molecular markers and  
    pedigree. Genetics 182(1):375–385 
Ma G, Jin Y, Li Y, Zhai F, Kok FJ, Jacobsen E, Yang X (2008) Iron and zinc deficiencies in China:  
    what is a feasible and cost-effective strategy? Public Health Nutr 11:632–638 
Maret W (2017) Zinc in cellular regulation: the nature and significance of “zinc signals”. Int J Mol  
    Sci 18:2285 
Maret W, Li Y (2009) Coordination dynamics of zinc in proteins. Chem Rev 109:4682–4707 
Martínez CP, Borrero J, Taboada R, Viana JL, Neves P, Narvaez L, Puldon V, Adames A, Vargas  
    A (2010) Rice cultivars with enhanced iron and zinc content to improve human nutrition. In:  
    28th International Rice Research Conference, Hanoi, Vietnam, 8–12 November 2010. OP10:  
    Quality Grain, Health, and Nutrition 
McDonald GK, Genc Y, Graham RD (2008) A simple method to evaluate genetic variation in grain  
    zinc concentration by correcting for differences in grain yield. Plant Soil 306:49. https://doi. 
    org/10.1007/s11104- 008- 9555- y 
Meuwissen THE, Hayes BJ, Goddard ME (2001) Prediction of total genetic value using genome-  
    wide dense marker maps. Genetics 157:1819–1829 
Milovanovic V,  Smutka  L  (2017) Asian  countries  in  the  global  rice  market. Acta  Univ Agric  
    Silvicult Mendel Brunensis 65(2):679–688. https://doi.org/10.11118/actaun201765020679 
Montesinos-Lopez   OA,   Montesinos-Lopez  A,   Crossa   J,   Toledo   FH,   Perez-Hernandez   O,  
    Eskridge KM et al (2016) A genomic Bayesian multi-trait and multi-environment model. G3  
    6(9):2725–2744. https://doi.org/10.1534/g3.116.032359 
Montesinos-López A, Montesinos-López OA, Gianola D, Crossa J, Hernández-Suárez CM (2019)  
    Multivariate Bayesian analysis of on-farm trials with multiple-trait and multiple-environment  
    data. Agron J 3(1):1–12. https://doi.org/10.2134/agronj2018.06.0362 
Morete MJ, Impa MS, Rubianes F, Beebout SEJ (2011) Characterization of zinc uptake and trans- 
    port  in  rice  under  reduced  conditions  in  agar  nutrient  solution.  In:  14th  Philippine  Society  
    of  Soil  Science  and  Technology,  Scientific  Conference,  25–27  May  2011.  Visayas  State  
    University, Baybay 

----------------------- Page 476-----------------------

468                                                                           M. I. C. Calayugan et al. 

Naik SM, Raman AK, Nagamallika M, Venkateshwarlu C, Singh SP, Kumar S, Singh SK, Ahmed  
    HU, Das SP, Prasad K, Izhar T, Mandal NP, Singh NK, Yadav S, Reinke R, Swamy BPM, Virk  
    P, Kumar A (2020) Genotype × environment interactions for grain iron and zinc content in rice.  
    J Sci Food Agric 100:4150. https://doi.org/10.1002/jsfa.10454 
Nha CT (2019) Dissection of QTL and genes for agronomic and biofortification traits in six con- 
    nected populations of rice. Dissertation. University of the Philippines, Los Baños. 224 p 
Norton GJ, Deacon CM, Xiong L, Huang S, Meharg AA, Price AH (2010) Genetic mapping of  
    the rice ionome in leaves and grain: identification of QTLs for 17 elements including arsenic,  
    cadmium, iron and selenium. Plant Soil 329:139–153 
Norton GJ, Douglas A, Lahner B, Yakubova E, Guerinot ML et al (2014) Genome wide association  
    mapping of grain arsenic, copper, molybdenum and zinc in rice (Oryza sativa L.) grown at four  
    international field sites. PLoS One 9(2):e89685. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0089685 
Nozoye  T,  Nagasaka  S,  Kobayashi  T,  Takahashi  M,  Sato Y,  Sato Y,  Uozumi  N,  Nakanishi  H,  
    Nishizawa NK (2011) Phytosiderophore efflux transporters are crucial for iron acquisition in  
    graminaceous plants. J Biol Chem 286:5446–5454 
Palanog AD, Calayugan MIC, Descalsota-Empleo GI et al (2019) Zinc and iron nutrition status in  
    the Philippines population and local soils. Front Nutr 6:81 
Pandian SS, Robin S, Vinod KK, Rajeswari S, Manonmani S, Subramanian KS, Saraswathi R,  
    Kirubhakaran  APM  (2011)  Influence  of  intrinsic  soil  factors  on  genotype-by-environment  
    interactions governing micronutrient content of milled rice grains. AJCS 5(13):1737–1744 
Peng S, Laza RC, Visperas RM, Sanico AL, Cassman KG, Khush GS (2000) Grain yield of rice  
    cultivars and lines developed in the Philippines since 1966. Crop Sci 40:307–314 
Peng S, Huang J, Sheehy JE, Laza RC, Visperas RM, Zhong XH et al (2004) Rice yields decline with  
    higher night temperature from global warming. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 101(27):9971–9975 
Prasad R, Shivay YS, Kumar D (2014) Agronomic biofortification of cereal grains with iron and  
    zinc. Adv Agron 125:55–91. https://doi.org/10.1016/B978- 0- 12- 800137- 0.00002- 9 
Ramesh SA, Shin R, Eide DJ, Schachtman P (2003) Differential metal selectivity and gene expres- 
    sion of two zinc transporters from rice. Plant Physiol 133:126–134 
Rampa F, Lammers E, Linnemann A, Schoustra S, de Winter D (2020) African indigenous foods:  
    opportunities for improved food and nutrition security. Food & Business Knowledge Platform.  
    https://knowledge4food.net/african- indigenous- foods/ 
Rana MK, Bhat KV (2004) A comparison of AFLP and RAPD markers for genetic diversity and  
    cultivar identification in cotton. J Plant Biochem Biotechnol 13:19–24 
Raza Q, Riaz A, Sabar M, Atif RM, Bashir K (2019) Meta-analysis of grain iron and zinc associ- 
    ated QTLs identified hotspot chromosomal regions and positional candidate genes for breeding  
    biofortified rice. Plant Sci 288:110214. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.plantsci.2019.110214 
Ritchie H, Reay D, Higgins P (2018) Quantifying, projecting, and addressing India’s hidden hun- 
    ger. Front Sustain Food Syst 2:11. https://doi.org/10.3389/fsufs.2018.00011 
Sasaki A, Yamaji N, Xia J, Ma JF (2011) OsYSL6 is involved in the detoxification of excess man- 
    ganese in rice. Plant Physiol 157:1832–1840 
Sathisha TN (2013) Genetic variation among traditional landraces of rice with specific reference to  
    nutrition al quality. Karnataka J Agric Sci 26:474 
Sazawal S, Black RE, Ramsan M, Chwaya HM, Dutta A, Dhingra U, Stoltzfus RJ, Othman MK,  
    Kabole FM (2007) Effect of zinc supplementation on mortality in children aged 1-48 months:  
    a community-based randomised placebo-controlled trial. Lancet 369(9565):927–934 
Schulthess AW, Yu W, Miedaner T, Wilde P, Reif JC, Zhao Y (2016) Multiple-trait and selection  
    indices genomic predictions for grain yield and protein content in rye for feeding purposes.  
    Theor Appl Genet 129:273–287 
Shamshad M, Sharma A (2018) The usage of genomic selection strategy in plant breeding. In: Next  
    generation plant breeding. InTech, Rijeka. https://doi.org/10.5772/intechopen.76247 
Siwela  M,  Pillay  K,  Govender  L,  Lottering  S  (2020)  Biofortified  crops  for  combating  hidden  
    hunger in South Africa: availability, acceptability, micronutrient retention and bioavailability.  
    Foods 9(6):815. https://doi.org/10.3390/foods9060815 
Soe YP (2020) Meta-analysis of quantitative trait loci associated with grain zinc content in rice.  
    Dissertation. University of the Philippines, Los Baños. 180 pp 

----------------------- Page 477-----------------------

Zinc-Biofortified Rice: A Sustainable Food-Based Product for Fighting Zinc Malnutrition            469 

Spindel J, Begum H, Akdemir D, Virk P, Collard B, Redoña E et al (2015) Genomic selection and  
    association mapping in rice (Oryza sativa): effect of trait genetic architecture, training popula- 
    tion composition, marker number and statistical model on accuracy of rice genomic selection in  
    elite, tropical rice breeding lines. PLoS Genet 11(2):e1004982. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal. 
    pgen.1004982 
Swamy BM, Vikram P, Dixit S, Ahmed HU, Kumar A (2011) Meta-analysis of grain yield QTL  
    identified during agricultural drought in grasses showed consensus. BMC Genomics 12:319.  
    https://doi.org/10.1186/1471- 2164- 12- 319 
Swamy  BPM,  Rahman  MA,  Inabangan-Asilo  MA, Amprado A,  Manito  C,  Chada-Mohanty  P,  
    Reinike R, Slamet-Loedin IH (2016) Advances in breeding for high grain Zinc in rice. Rice  
    9:49. https://doi.org/10.1186/s12284- 016- 0122- 5 
Swamy BPM, Kaladhar K, Anuradha K, Batchu AK, Longvah T, Sarla N (2018a) QTL analysis  
    for grain iron and zinc concentrations in two O. nivara derived backcross populations. Rice Sci  
    25(4):197–207. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rsci.2018.06.003 
Swamy BPM, Descalsota GIL, Nha CT, Amparado A, Inabangan-Asilo MA, Manito C, Tesoro F,  
    Reinke R (2018b) Identification of genomic regions associated with agronomic and biofortifi- 
    cation traits in DH populations of rice. PLoS One 13(8):1–20. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal. 
    pone.0201756 
Szymlek-Gay EA, Ferguson EL, Heath AL, Gray AR, Gibson RS (2009) Food-based strategies  
    improve iron status in toddlers: a randomized controlled trial. Am J Clin Nutr 90:1541–1551 
Tielsch JM, Khatry SK, Stoltzfus RJ et al (2007) Effect of daily zinc supplementation on child  
    mortality in southern Nepal: a community-based, cluster randomized, placebo-controlled trail.  
    Lancet 370:1230–1239 
Torheim LE, Ferguson EL, Penrose K, Arimond M (2010) Women in resource-poor settings are at  
    risk of inadequate intakes of multiple micronutrients. J Nutr 140:2051S–2058S 
Trijatmiko KR, Dueñas C, Tsakirpaloglou N, Torrizo L, Arines FM, Adeva C, Balindong J, Oliva  
    N, Sapasap MV, Borrero J, Rey J, Francisco P, Nelson A, Nakanishi H, Lombi E, Tako E,  
    Glahn RP, Stangoulis J, Chadha-Mohanty P, Johnson AAT, Tohme J, Barry G, Slamet-Loedin  
    IH (2016) Biofortified indica rice attains iron and zinc nutrition dietary targets in the field. Sci  
    Rep 6:19792. https://doi.org/10.1038/srep19792 
Tripoli M, Schmidhuber J (2018) Emerging opportunities for the application of blockchain in the  
    agri-food industry. FAO, ICTSD, Rome, Geneva. Licence: CC BY-NC-SA 3.0 IGO 
Tsakirpaloglou N, Mallikarjuna Swamy BP, Acuin C, Slamet-Loedin IH (2019) Biofortified Zn  
    and Fe rice: potential contribution for dietary mineral and human health. In: Jaiwal P, Chhillar  
    A, Chaudhary D, Jaiwal R (eds) Nutritional quality improvement in plants. Concepts and strat- 
    egies in plant sciences. Springer, Cham 
UNICEF (2013) Improving child nutrition: the achievable imperative for global progress. United  
    Nations Children’s Fund, United Nations Organization, New York, NY 
Wang Y, Wei Y, Dong L, Lu L, Feng Y, Zhang J et al (2014) Improved yield and Zn accumulation  
    for rice grain by Zn fertilization and optimized water management. J Zhejiang Univ Sci B  
    15(4):365–374. https://doi.org/10.1631/jzus.b1300263 
Wassmann R, Jagadish SVK, Sumfleth K, Pathak H, Howell G, Ismail A et al (2009) Regional  
    vulnerability of climate change impacts on Asian rice production and scope for adaptation.  
    Adv Agron 102:91–133 
Welch RM, Graham RD (2004) Breeding for micronutrients in staple food crops from a human  
    nutrition perspective. J Exp Bot 55:353–364 
White PJ, Broadley MR (2009) Biofortification of crops with seven mineral elements often lacking  
    in human diets – iron, zinc, copper, calcium, magnesium, selenium and iodine. Review. New  
    Phytol 182:49–84. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1469- 8137.2008.02738.x 
WHO (World Health Organization) (1998) Complementary feeding of young children in develop- 
    ing countries: a review of current scientific knowledge. WHO, Geneva 
WHO (World Health Organization) (2003) Joint WHO/FAO Expert Consultation on diet, nutrition  
    and the prevention of chronic diseases. WHO, Geneva 
Widodo B, Broadley MR, Rose T, Frei M, Pariasca-Tanaka J, Yoshihashi T, Thomson M, Hammond  
    JP, Aprile A, Close TJ, Ismail AM, Wissuwa MM (2010) Response to zinc deficiency of two  

----------------------- Page 478-----------------------

470                                                                              M. I. C. Calayugan et al. 

    rice lines with contrasting tolerance is determined by root growth maintenance and organic acid  
    exudation rates, and not by zinc-transporter activity. New Phytol 186:400–414 
Wissuwa  M,  Ismail  AM,  Graham  RD  (2008)  Rice  grain  zinc  concentrations  as  affected  by  
    genotype,  native  soil-zinc  availability,  and  zinc  fertilization.  Plant  Soil  306:37.  https://doi. 
    org/10.1007/s11104- 007- 9368- 4 
Young G, Mortimer E, Gopalsamy G, Alpers D, Binder H, Manary M et al (2014) Zinc deficiency  
    in children with environmental enteropathy—development of new strategies: report from an  
    expert workshop. Am J Clin Nutr 100(4):1198–1207. https://doi.org/10.3945/ajcn.113.075036 
Zarcinas BA, Cartwright B, Spouncer LR (1987) Nitric acid digestion and multi element analysis  
    of plant material by inductively coupled plasma spectrometry. Commun Soil Sci Plant Anal  
    18:131–146 
Zaw H, Raghavan C, Pocsedio A, Swamy BPM, Jubay ML, Singh RK et al (2019) Exploring  
    genetic architecture of grain yield and quality traits in a 16-way indica by japonica rice MAGIC  
    global population. Sci Rep 9(1):1–11. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598- 019- 55357- 7 
Zhang Y, Xu Y, Yi H, Gong J (2012) Vacuolar membrane transporters OsVIT1 and OsVIT2 modu- 
    late iron translocation between flag leaves and seeds in rice. Plant J 72:400–410 

Open Access      This chapter is licensed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution 4.0  
International License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/), which permits use, sharing,  
adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give appropriate  
credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons license and  
indicate if changes were made. 
    The images or other third party material in this chapter are included in the chapter's Creative  
Commons license, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not  
included in the chapter's Creative Commons license and your intended use is not permitted by  
statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from  
the copyright holder. 

----------------------- Page 479-----------------------

Biofortification of Rice Grains  
for Increased Iron Content 

Jerlie Mhay Matres, Erwin Arcillas, Maria Florida Cueto-Reaño,  
Ruby Sallan-Gonzales, Kurniawan R. Trijatmiko, and Inez Slamet-Loedin 

Abstract  Dietary iron (Fe) deficiency affects 14% of the world population with  
significant health impacts. Biofortification is the process of increasing the density of  
vitamins  and  minerals  in  a  crop,  through  conventional  breeding,  biotechnology  
approaches, or agronomic practices. This process has recently been shown to suc- 
cessfully alleviate micronutrient deficiency for populations with limited access to  
diverse diets in several countries (https://www.harvestplus.org/). The Fe breeding  
target in the HarvestPlus program was set based on average rice consumption to  
fulfil 30% of the Estimated Average Requirement of Fe in women and children. In  
this  review,  we  present  the  reported  transgenic  approaches  to  increase  grain  Fe.  
Insertion of a single or multiple genes encoding iron storage protein, metal trans- 
porter, or enzyme involved in the biosynthesis of metal chelator in the rice genome  
was shown to be a viable approach to significantly increase grain-Fe density. The  
most successful approach to reach the Fe breeding target was by overexpression of  
multiple genes. Despite this success, a significant effort of 8–10 years needs to be  
dedicated from the proof of concept to varietal release. This includes large-scale  
plant transformation, event selection, collection of data for premarket safety assur- 
ance, securing biosafety permits for consumption and propagation, and collection of  
data for variety registration. 

Keywords  Rice · Grain · Iron · Biofortification · Genetic engineering 

J. M. Matres · E. Arcillas · M. F. Cueto-Reaño · R. Sallan-Gonzales · I. Slamet-Loedin  
International Rice Research Institute, Los Baños, Laguna, Philippines  

K. R. Trijatmiko (*)  
Strategic Innovation Platform, International Rice Research Institute,   
Los Baños, Laguna, Philippines 
e-mail: k.trijatmiko@irri.org 

© The Author(s) 2021                                                                           471 
J. Ali, S. H. Wani (eds.), Rice Improvement,  
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-66530-2_14 

----------------------- Page 480-----------------------

472                                                                            J. M. Matres et al. 

1     Introduction 

Nutritional deficiency is an important global health concern that affects approxi- 
mately 1.86 billion people worldwide, and 61% of it is caused by dietary iron (Fe)  
deficiency (James et al.  2018). Iron deficiency anemia results in decreased work  
productivity, increased maternal mortality, increased child mortality, slowed child  
development, and increased susceptibility to infectious diseases (Stoltzfus  2001).  
Iron  deficiency  anemia  is  estimated  to  be  responsible  for  800,000  deaths/year  
(WHO 2002). 
    Although providing access to more diverse diets is the ideal solution to alleviate  
micronutrient deficiency, this may not be achieved in the near future in developing  
and less developed countries. Iron supplementation and industrial fortification have  
been shown to alleviate micronutrient deficiencies but require continuous signifi- 
cant budget allocation at the government or household level. Despite the potential to  
diminish iron deficiency in the population, this may not help people living in remote  
rural  areas  because  of  the  lack  of  infrastructure,  purchasing  power,  or  access  to  
markets and healthcare systems (Mayer et al. 2008). Biofortification, a process of  
increasing the concentration of micronutrient in the edible part of a crop through  
conventional plant breeding, transgenic methods, and agronomic practices, offers a  
feasible  and  cost-effective  approach,  complementing  other  efforts  to  reach  rural  
populations (Bouis and Saltzman 2017). 

2     Target Concentration for Fe in Polished Rice 

The Estimated Average Requirement (EAR) of iron for non-pregnant, non-lactating  
women is 1460 mg/day, and for children 4–6 years old is 500 mg/day (WHO/FAO  
2004). Current studies show that 90% of the iron remains in the grain after process- 
ing, while the nutritionist assumption is that 10% of the iron is bioavailable. With  
400 g/day per capita rice consumption for an adult woman and 120 g/day for chil- 
dren 4–6 years old, the HarvestPlus program set 13 μg/g as the final target concen- 
tration for Fe in polished rice to achieve 30% of the EAR (Bouis et al. 2011). 

3     Iron Biofortification via Conventional Plant Breeding 

Initial  screening  of  the  germplasm  collection  at  the  International  Rice  Research  
Institute (IRRI) showed that the range in Fe concentration in  brown rice among  
1138 genotypes tested was 6.3–24.4 μg/g (Gregorio et al. 1999). However, the vari- 
ation in Fe concentration in milled rice becomes narrow due to the high proportion  
of Fe lost during milling. A study on the iron concentration of brown and milled rice  
of six varieties collected from ten commercial rice mills in one province in Vietnam  

----------------------- Page 481-----------------------

Biofortification of Rice Grains for Increased Iron Content                                  473 

showed that the percentage of Fe loss due to milling ranged from 65% to 82% (Hoa  
and  Lan  2004).  Furthermore,  the  maximal  iron  concentration  in  milled  rice  was  
8 μg/g over 11,337 genotypes from the International Center for Tropical Agriculture  
(CIAT) core collection (Martínez et al. 2010). At IRRI, the highest Fe concentration  
of  7.4  μg/g  in  polished  rice  was  achieved  by  classical  breeding  (Virk  et  al.  
2006, 2007). 
   To  reach  the  Fe  target  of  13  μg/g  in  polished  rice,  transgenic  approaches  are  
potential options because of the low concentration of Fe found in the rice gene pool.  
Efforts have been made to study the physiology as well as the genetic basis and  
biochemical  mechanisms  involved  in  Fe  uptake  and  translocation  in  crops  and  
model plants. These studies have facilitated the detection of the limiting factors that  
could be manipulated to increase Fe concentration in rice grain. 

4     Iron Uptake and Translocation 

Iron is an important micronutrient required in various processes such as photosyn- 
thesis and respiration. Based on the strategy they use to uptake iron from the rhizo- 
sphere,  higher  plants  can  be  categorized  into  three  different  groups  (Connorton  
et al. 2017): (1) Strategy I plants (all dicotyledonous plants and non-graminaceous  
monocots) that rely on the reduction of ferric Fe(III) to ferrous Fe(II), (2) Strategy  
II plants (graminaceous monocots) that rely on the chelation strategy involving phy- 
tosiderophore secretion, and (3) a combination of both. Arabidopsis has been used  
as a model plant to study Strategy I plants. Some major genes responsible for iron  
uptake using this strategy have been identified: iron-regulated transporter 1 (IRT1)  
(Eide  et  al.  1996),  ferric-chelate  oxidase  2  (FRO2)  (Robinson  et  al.  1999),  and  
HC-ATPase (HA) genes (Kobayashi and Nishizawa 2012). 
   Rice has been used as a model plant to study Strategy II plants. Plants in this  
group that include the most important cereals in the world secrete phytosiderophore  
(PS) in the rhizospere. PS is a high-Fe-affinity organic molecule from the mugineic  
acid family (Bashir et al. 2017; Borrill et al. 2014; Kobayashi et al. 2005; Suzuki  
et  al.  2006).  Figure  1  presents  the  basic  scheme  for  the  genes  involved  in  iron  
homeostasis in rice. 
   Mugineic  acid  is  synthesized  through  a  conserved  pathway  that  starts  from  
S-adenosyl-l-methionine. It is then followed by sequential reactions catalyzed by  
nicotianamine  synthase  (NAS),  nicotianamine  aminotransferase  (NAAT),  and  
deoxymugineic  acid  synthase  (DMAS)  enzymes,  producing  20-deoxymugineic  
acid (DMA), a precursor of different types of mugineic acids (Bashir et al. 2006;  
Higuchi et al.  1999; Kobayashi and Nishizawa 2012; Takahashi et al. 1999). In rice  
roots, secretion of DMA is influenced by the expression of the TOM1 geneencoding  
efflux transporter of DMA (Nozoye et al. 2011). YELLOW STRIPE 1 (YS1) and  
YELLOW STRIPE 1-like (YSL1) transporters are known for their role in facilitat- 
ing the uptake of Fe–MA complexes into root cells (Curie et al. 2001; Inoue et al.  
2009). After reduction by ascorbate, the Fe(III)–DMA complex is likely converted  

----------------------- Page 482-----------------------

474                                                                                  J. M. Matres et al. 

Fig. 1. Iron uptake, translocation, and storage in rice.     TOM1 transporter of mugineic acid  
family phytosiderophores 1, YS1 yellow stripe 1,  YSL15 yellow stripe 1-like, IRT1 iron-regulated  
transporter, NRAMP1 natural resistance-associated macrophage protein 1,  FRO ferric reductase  
oxidase,  FRDL1  ferric  reductase  defective-like1,  ENA  efflux  transporter  of  nicotianamine,  VIT  
vacuolar iron transporter, FER ferritin, MA mugineic acid, DMA 2′-deoxymugineic acid, NA nico- 
tianamine,  SAM  S-adenosyl-l-methionine,  NAS  nicotianamine  synthase,  NAAT  nicotianamine  
aminotransferase, DMAS deoxymugineic acid synthase 

----------------------- Page 483-----------------------

Biofortification of Rice Grains for Increased Iron Content                                  475 

to Fe(II)–NA, and then excreted to the xylem. The Fe may create complexes primar- 
ily with citrate and some with DMA for further transport (Yoneyama et al. 2015). 
   Aside from using Strategy II, rice may be able to uptake Fe(II) directly, as indi- 
cated by the presence of a ferrous transporter (OsIRT1) in the genome. Other metal  
transporters involved in Strategy I and Strategy II were also identified such as natu- 
ral  resistance-associated  macrophage  protein  (NRAMP)  and  ZIP  (zinc-regulated  
transporter, IRT-like protein) family (Cailliatte et al. 2010; Guerinot 2000; Lanquar  
et al. 2005). 
   Fe translocation in higher plants is a complex process involving xylem loading/ 
unloading, phloem loading/unloading, and reabsorption (Kim and Guerinot 2007).  
Different chelators such as citrate, nicotianamine (NA), and MAs play an essential  
role   in   symplast   metal   homeostasis   (Garcia-Oliveira   et   al.   2018).   FERRIC  
REDUCTASE  DEFECTIVE-LIKE  1  (OsFRDL1)  in  rice  (Fig.  1)  is  known  to  
encode a citrate transporter involved in the transport of Fe-citrate complex (Inoue  
et al. 2004; Yokosho et al. 2009). 
   The rice YSL family encoding influx transporter consists of 18 members (Curie  
et al. 2009). The OsYSL2 transporter is a carrier of Fe(II)–NA and is involved in  
iron transport to sink tissues (Koike et al. 2004). OsYSL15 transports Fe(III)–DMA  
and is involved in Fe uptake in the root and long-distance Fe transport. The Fe trans- 
porter OsYSL18 may play a specific role in fertilization, as indicated by specific  
expression in the pollen and pollen tubes. OsYSL18 may also be involved in Fe  
transport  in  the  phloem  (Kobayashi  and  Nishizawa  2012). As  indicated  by  their  
vascular tissue expression in rice, OsIRT1 and OsTOM1 may be involved in Fe  
translocation within the plant as well (Ishimaru et al. 2006; Nozoye et al. 2011). 

5     Iron Biofortification via Genetic Engineering 

Several  efforts  have  been  conducted  to  increase  Fe  concentration  in  rice  grains.  
These studies can be categorized into different approaches: (1) overexpression of  
geneencoding  iron  storage  protein,  (2)  overexpression  of  geneencoding  enzyme  
involved in the biosynthesis of metal chelator, (3) overexpression of geneencoding  
metal transporter, and (4) a combination of two or three approaches (Tables 1 and 2). 
   Fe concentration of 38.1 μg/g in brown rice was achieved by endosperm-specific  
expression of a soybean Fe storage protein, SoyFerH1 (Goto et al.  1999). Similar  
approaches  using  the  SoyferH1  gene  driven  by  different  promoters  (OsGluB1,  
OsGluB4, OsGlb1, ZmUbi-1) in different backgrounds (Swarna, IR68144, BR29,  
IR64, M12) were reported (Slamet-Loedin et al. 2015). Stable Fe concentrations of  
9.2 or 7.6 μg/g over several generations were obtained (Khalekuzzaman et al. 2006;  
Oliva et al. 2014). Overexpression of the OsFer2 gene was also studied and Fe con- 
centration of 15.9  μg/g, vis-à-vis 7  μg/g in control variety Pusa-Sugandh II, was  
observed (Paul et al. 2012). 
   Another approach in improving grain-Fe concentration in rice is by increasing  
the expression of genes encoding enzymes involved in the biosynthesis of metal  

----------------------- Page 484-----------------------

                                                                                                                                                                                                                  4 
Table 1   Summary of transgenic approaches to develop iron-rich milled rice                                                                                                                                       7 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  6 
                                                                                               Iron ([c] in μg/g)           Growth  
                                                          Mechanism involved                   TG             WT            condition            Cultivar                      References 
 Rice gene overexpression 
 OsNAS1                                                   Iron uptake and                      Up to ~40      ~20           Greenhouse           Japonica cv. EYI 105          Díaz-Benito et al.  
                                                          translocation                                                                                                        (2018) 
 OsNAS2                                                   Iron uptake and                      ~10            ~4            Greenhouse           Japonica cv. Dongjin          Lee et al. (2012) 
                                                          translocation 
 OsNAS3                                                   Iron uptake and                      ~12            ~4            Greenhouse           Japonica cv. EYI 105          Lee et al. (2009b) 
                                                          translocation 
 OsNAS1, OsNAS2, OsNAS3                                   Iron uptake and                      Up to ~19      ~4.5          Greenhouse           Japonica cv.                  Johnson et al. (2011) 
                                                          translocation                                                                          Nipponbare 
 OsYSL2                                                   Iron uptake and                      ~7.5           ~1.8          Greenhouse           Japonica cv.                  Ishimaru et al.  
                                                          translocation                                                                          Tsukinohikari                 (2010) 
 Osfer2                                                   Storage                              Up to          ~7            Greenhouse           Indica cv. Pusa-              Paul et al. (2012) 
                                                                                               ~15.9                                             Sugandh II 
 Rice gene silencing/knockdown mutant 
 OsVIT2                                                   Inter-cellular/intra-cellular   ~8                  ~5                                 Japonica cv. Dongjin          Bashir et al. (2013) 
                                                          transport and storage 
 OsYSL9                                                   Inter-cellular/intra-cellular   Up to               1                                  Japonica cv.                  Senoura et al. (2017) 
                                                          transport and storage                ~2.5                                              Tsukinohikari 
 OsDMAS1                                                  Inter-cellular/intra-cellular   ~5                  ~5                                 Japonica cv. Dongjin          Bashir et al. (2017) 
                                                          transport and storage 
 Rice gene knockout mutant 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  J 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  . 
 OsVMT                                                    Inter-cellular/intra-cellular   9                   4             Greenhouse           Japonica cv.                  Che et al. (2019)                    
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  M 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  . 
                                                          transport and storage                                                                  Nipponbare                                                         
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  M 
 Overexpression of genes from different species                                                                                                                                                                   a 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  t 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  r 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  e 
 HvNAS1                                                   Iron uptake and                      ~8.5           ~4            Greenhouse           Japonica cv.                  Masuda et al. (2009)               s 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  e 
                                                          translocation                                                                          Tsukinohikari                                                    t 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  a 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  l 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  . 

----------------------- Page 485-----------------------

                                                                                                                                                                 B 
                                                                                                                                                                 i 
                                                                                                                                                                 o 
                                                                                                                                                                 f 
                                                                        Iron ([c] in μg/g)                                                                       o 
                                                                                                                                                                 r 
                                                                                               Growth  
                                                                                                                                                                 t 
                                                                                                                                                                 i 
                                                                                                                                                                 fi 
                                            Mechanism involved          TG          WT         condition       Cultivar                References 
                                                                                                                                                                 c 
                                                                                                                                                                 a 
HvYS1                                       Iron uptake and             Up to ~9    ~4                         Japonica cv. EYI 105    Banakar et al.            t 
                                                                                                                                                                 i 
                                                                                                                                                                 o 
                                            translocation                                                                              (2017a)                   n 
                                                                                                                                                                   
                                                                                                                                                                 o 
                                                                                                                                                                 f 
AtIRT1                                      Iron uptake and             Up to       ~2.28      Greenhouse      Japonica cv. Taipei     Boonyaves et al.            
                                                                                                                                                                 R 
                                                                                                                                                                 i 
                                            translocation               ~4.86                                  309                     (2016)                    c 
                                                                                                                                                                 e 
                                                                                                                                                                   
SoyferH1                                    Storage                     Up to ~37   ~10        Screenhouse     Indica cv. IR68144      Vasconcelos et al.        G 
                                                                                                                                                                 r 
                                                                                                                                                                 a 
                                                                                                                                       (2003)                    i 
                                                                                                                                                                 n 
                                                                                                                                                                 s 
SoyferH1                                    Storage                     Up to       ~3.8       Greenhouse      Indica cv. BR29         Khalekuzzaman              f 
                                                                                                                                                                 o 
                                                                        ~9.2                                                           et al. (2006)             r  
                                                                                                                                                                 I 
                                                                                                                                                                 n 
SoyferH1                                    Storage                     Up to ~16   ~6.75      Greenhouse      Indica cv. Swarna       Paul et al. (2014)        c 
                                                                                                                                                                 r 
                                                                                                                                                                 e 
SoyferH1                                    Storage                     Up to       ~3.3       Greenhouse      Indica cv. IR64         Oliva et al. (2014)       a 
                                                                                                                                                                 s 
                                                                                                                                                                 e 
                                                                        ~7.6                                                                                     d 
                                                                                                                                                                   
                                                                                                                                                                 I 
                                                                                                                                                                 r 
Multigene overexpression of genes from different species                                                                                                         o 
                                                                                                                                                                 n 
                                                                                                                                                                   
SoyferH2 + HvNAS1 + OsYSL2                  Combined mechanisms         Up to ~4    ~1         Paddy field     Japonica cv.            Masuda et al. (2012)      C 
                                                                                                                                                                 o 
                                                                                                               Tsukinohikari                                     n 
                                                                                                                                                                 t 
                                                                                                                                                                 e 
                                                                                                                                                                 n 
HvNAS1, HvNAS1 + HvNAAT, IDS3               Combined mechanisms         Up to       ~5.8       Paddy field     Japonica cv.            Suzuki et al. (2008)      t 
                                                                        ~7.3                                   Tsukinohikari 
SoyferH2 + HvNAS1 + OsYSL2                  Combined mechanisms         ~6.3        ~3.2       Greenhouse      Tropical Japonica cv.   Aung et al. (2013) 
                                                                        (~5.02)     (~1.46)                    Paw San Yin 
AtNAS1 + Pvfer + Afphytase                  Combined mechanisms         Up to ~7    ~1         Hydroponic      Japonica cv. Taipei     Wirth et al. (2009) 
                                                                                                               309 
AtIRT1 , Pvfer, AtNAS1                      Combined mechanisms         Up to       ~2.7       Greenhouse      Japonica cv.            Boonyaves et al.  
                                                                        ~10.46                                 Nipponbare              (2017) 
SoyferH1 + OsNAS2                           Combined mechanisms         ~15         ~2.5       Paddy field     Indica cv. IR64         Trijatmiko et al.  
                                                                                                                                       (2016) 
AtNAS1 + AtFRD3 + Pvfer,                    Combined mechanisms         Up to       ~2.05      Greenhouse      Japonica cv.            Wu et al. (2018) 
AtFRD3 + Pvfer                                                          ~11.08                                 Nipponbare 
                                                                                                                                                                  4 
                                                                                                                                                                  7 
                                                                                                                                                (continued)       7 

----------------------- Page 486-----------------------

                                                                                                                                                                                                                    4 
Table 1   (continued)                                                                                                                                                                                               7 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    8 
                                                                                               Iron ([c] in μg/g)            Growth  
                                                          Mechanism involved                   TG              WT            condition            Cultivar                      References 
 AtNAS1 + Pvfer + AtNRAMP3 ,                              Combined mechanisms                  Up to           ~2.72         Greenhouse           Indica cv. IR64               Wu et al. (2019) 
 Pvfer + AtNRAMP3                                                                              ~13.65 
 AtNAS1 + Pvfer + ZmPSY + PaCRT1                          Combined mechanisms                  Up to           ~1.82         Greenhouse          Japonica cv.                   Singh et al. (2017) 
                                                                                               ~6.02                                             Nipponbare 
 OsNAS1, HvHAATb, OsNAS1 + HvHAATb                        Combined mechanisms                  Up to ~18       ~4            Hydroponic          Japonica cv. EYI 105           Banakar et al.  
                                                                                                                                                                                (2017b) 
 OsNAS1, HvNAATb, OsNAS1 + HvNAATb                        Combined mechanisms                  Up to ~55       ~20           Greenhouse          Japonica cv. EYI 105           Díaz-Benito et al.  
                                                                                                                                                                                (2018) 
 SoyferH2 + HvNAS1 + HvNAAT-                              Combined mechanisms                  Fourfold                      Greenhouse           Japonica cv.                  Masuda et al. (2013) 
 A,-B + IDS3                                                                                                                                      Tsukinohikari 

                                                                                                                                                                                                                   J 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   . 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   M 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   . 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   M 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   a 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   t 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   r 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   e 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   s 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   e 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   t 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   a 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   l 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   . 

----------------------- Page 487-----------------------

                                                                                                                                                                B 
Table 2   Summary of transgenic approaches to develop iron-rich brown rice                                                                                      i 
                                                                                                                                                                o 
                                                                                                                                                                f 
                                                                                                                                                                o 
                                                            Iron ([c] in μg/g)                                                                                  r 
                                                                                                                                                                t 
                                                                                Growth  
                                                                                                                                                                i 
                                                                                                                                                                fi 
                                                                                                                                                                c 
                        Mechanism involved                  TG          WT      condition         Cultivar                   References 
                                                                                                                                                                a 
                                                                                                                                                                t 
                                                                                                                                                                i 
 Rice gene overexpression                                                                                                                                       o 
                                                                                                                                                                n 
                                                                                                                                                                  
 OslRT1                 Iron uptake and translocation       ~12         ~10     Paddy field       Japonica cv. Dongjin       Lee and An (2009)                  o 
                                                                                                                                                                f 
                                                                                                                                                                  
 TOM1                   Iron uptake and translocation       ~18         ~15     Hydroponic        Japonica cv.               Nozoye et al. (2011)               R 
                                                                                                                                                                i 
                                                                                                                                                                c 
                                                                                                  Tsukinohikari                                                 e 
                                                                                                                                                                  
                                                                                                                                                                G 
 OsNAS1                 Iron uptake and translocation      Up to ~19    ~12     Paddy field       Japonica cv. Xiushui 110   Zheng et al. (2010)                r 
                                                                                                                                                                a 
                                                                                                                                                                i 
 OsYSL13                Iron uptake and translocation       ~15         ~11     Greenhouse        Japonica cv.               Zhang et al. (2018)                n 
                                                                                                                                                                s 
                                                                                                                                                                  
                                                                                                                                                                f 
                                                                                                  Zhonghua 11                                                   o 
                                                                                                                                                                r 
                                                                                                                                                                  
                                                                                                                                                                I 
 OsYSL15                Iron uptake and translocation       ~14         ~12     Paddy field       Japonica cv. Dongjin       Lee et al. (2009a)                 n 
                                                                                                                                                                c 
                                                                                                                                                                r 
 OsbHLH                 Iron uptake and translocation       ~35         ~18     Hydroponic        Japonica cv. Nipponbare    Kobayashi et al. (2019)            e 
                                                                                                                                                                a 
                                                                                                                                                                s 
 OsIRO2                 Iron deficiency response           Up to        ~6      Greenhouse        Japonica cv.               Ogo et al. (2011)                  e 
                                                                                                                                                                d 
                                                                                                                                                                  
                                                            ~15.5                                 Tsukinohikari                                                 I 
                                                                                                                                                                r 
                                                                                                                                                                o 
 TOM2                   Iron deficiency response                                Hydroponic        Japonica cv. Nipponbare    Nozoye et al. (2015)               n  
                                                                                                                                                                C 
 Rice gene silencing/knockdown mutant                                                                                                                           o 
                                                                                                                                                                n 
                                                                                                                                                                t 
                                                                                                                                                                e 
 OsVIT1                 Inter-cellular/intra-cellular       ~26         ~20     Paddy field       Japonica cv.               Zhang et al. (2012)                n 
                        transport and storage                                                     Zhonghua 11                                                   t 

 OsVIT2                 Inter-cellular/intra-cellular       ~28         ~20     Paddy field       Japonica cv. Dongjin       Zhang et al. (2012) 
                        transport and storage 
 Overexpression of genes of different species 
 SoyferH1               Storage                            Up to ~38    ~14.3   Greenhouse        Japonica cv. Kitaake       Goto et al. (1999) 
 SoyferH1               Storage                             ~18         ~18     Greenhouse        Indica cv. M12             Drakakaki et al. (2000) 
 SoyferH1               Storage                            Up to ~25    ~17     Greenhouse        Japonica cv. Kitaake       Qu et al. (2005) 
 Multigene overexpression of genes of different species 
 Pvfer + rgMT + phyA    Combined mechanisms                 ~22         ~10     Greenhouse        Japonica cv. Taipei 309    Lucca et al. (2002) 

                                                                                                                                                                 4 
                                                                                                                                                                 7 
                                                                                                                                                                 9 

----------------------- Page 488-----------------------

480                                                                            J. M. Matres et al. 

chelator. OsNAS1 overexpression resulted in Fe concentration of 19 μg/g in brown  
rice; however, the concentration decreased to only 5  μg/g after polishing (Zheng  
et  al.  2010).  Co-overexpression  of  OsNAS1  and  HvNAAT  genes  in  japonica  rice  
resulted in Fe concentration of 18 μg/g in the polished grain (Banakar et al. 2017b).  
Fe concentration of 55  μg/g in the succeeding generation was observed; however,  
this unusually high Fe concentration suggests either low milling degree or Fe con- 
tamination  (Díaz-Benito  et  al.  2018).  Overexpression  and  activation  tagging  of  
OsNAS2, on the other hand, resulted in 19  μg/g and 10  μg/g Fe concentration in  
polished rice, respectively (Johnson et al. 2011; Lee et al. 2012). Meanwhile, activa- 
tion tagging of OsNAS3 achieved 12 μg/g Fe in polished grain vis-à-vis 4 μg/g Fe in  
the wild type (Lee et al. 2009b). 
    Several studies reported increased Fe uptake and translocation by overexpression  
of  genes  encoding  metal  transporter,  including  OsYSL2  (Ishimaru  et  al.  2010),  
OsYSL15  (Lee  et  al.  2009a),  and  OsYSL9  (Senoura  et  al.  2017).  OsYSL2  and  
OsYSL15 are responsible for the uptake of Fe(II)–NA and Fe(III)–DMA, respec- 
tively, whereas  OsYSL9 is involved in the transport of both complexes. Although  
only a minimal Fe increase was detected in T1 brown rice of OsYSL9 and OsYSL15  
OE lines, overexpression of OsYSL2 resulted in a fourfold increase in Fe concentra- 
tion in T1 polished rice. 
    Recently,  two  studies  reported  significant  Fe  concentration  increases  in  rice  
grains  by  overexpressing  multiple  genes.  Wu  et  al.  (2019)  overexpressed  the  
AtNAS1 , Pvfer, and AtNRAMP3 genes, resulting in 13.65 μg/g Fe in polished grains  
under greenhouse conditions. Trijatmiko et al. (2016), on the other hand, reported  
an Fe concentration of 15 μg/g in polished grains under field conditions by overex- 
pressing nicotianamine synthase (OsNAS2) and soybean ferritin (SoyferH-1) genes.  
This high-Fe rice event did not show a yield penalty in field trials in the Philippines  
and Colombia. The grain quality of the transgenic event was similar to that of the  
IR64 genotype background used for transformation. These two studies show the  
potential for further advanced development of a biofortified rice product with ele- 
vated Fe concentration. 

6     Future Directions 

There is little prospect of achieving the target Fe concentration to reach 30% of the  
EAR via conventional plant breeding because of limited genetic variation in the Fe  
concentration in polished grains within the global rice germplasm collection. On the  
contrary,  recent  studies  show  that  the  target  concentration  can  be  achieved  via  
genetic engineering. Under the current regulations in different countries, it usually  
takes 8-10 years from proof of concept to market release of genetically modified  
(GM) crops (Mumm 2013). The best performing events need to be selected from  
large-scale transformation. These events, aside from showing stable and acceptable  
trait  expression,  should  have  a  simple  integration  of  transgenes  and  have  no  

----------------------- Page 489-----------------------

Biofortification of Rice Grains for Increased Iron Content                                  481 

disruption    of   endogenous     genes    with    important    phenotypic     manifestation.  
Significant efforts need to be dedicated to collecting data for premarket safety assur- 
ance  of  the  potential  product,  such  as  detailed  molecular  characterization  of  the  
event,  safety  of  newly  expressed  proteins,  novel  protein  expression  and  dietary  
exposure analysis, comparative nutritional analysis, and some environmental safety  
data collected from multi-location and multi-season field trials. After a biosafety per- 
mit for propagation of the event has been secured, developers need to follow similar  
procedures as in conventional breeding of a product for variety registration. 
   High Fe content is a consumer trait. To facilitate adoption by farmers, this micro- 
nutrient  trait  needs  to  be  combined  with  agronomic  traits. The  most  prospective  
agronomic trait for farmer adoption is higher yield. For this purpose, the possibility  
to incorporate the high-Fe trait into hybrid rice needs to be explored. The high-yield  
trait obtained through heterosis can be combined with nutritional traits. In addition,  
we observed that overexpression of some genes for Fe enhancement might cause  
unintended effects such as a yield decrease when the plants were in a homozygous  
condition. However, this is not detrimental when only one allele is present in hemi- 
zygous condition, and in some cases the micronutrient concentration can be retained  
in the hemizygous condition. In such a situation, hybrid rice can be a solution to  
achieve higher micronutrient concentration using a wider gene pool. 
   Recent developments in the regulation of genome-edited crops in different coun- 
tries have attracted many scientists to work on genome editing. In the United States,  
certain categories of modified plants would be exempted from the regulations if the  
product  can  also  be  created  through  conventional  breeding  (APHIS  2020).  In  
Argentina, a resolution on New Breeding Techniques (NBT) was passed in 2015,  
which rules that, if a transgene is not used or a transgene is used but is removed in  
the final product, it will not be classified as a GM product (Friedrichs et al. 2019).  
Precise genome editing technology that produces a double-stranded break in the  
genome, followed by the repair of this break that leads to a mutation or deletion,  
may result in a product that meets the non-GM regulatory classification. 
   Increased Fe concentration in polished grains was observed on the T-DNA inser- 
tion mutant of OsVIT2 (Bashir et al. 2013). The insertion of the T-DNA in the pro- 
moter region in this mutant led to the knockdown of the OsVIT2 gene (Bashir et al.  
2013).  Genome  editing  can  be  used  to  mutate  the  regulatory  elements  of  genes  
involved in Fe homeostasis. This type of editing could result in altered expression  
of the genes and consequently enhanced Fe concentration in rice grains. 
   Although genome editing has great potential to ease the burden of regulatory  
requirements, genetic engineering will still be the primary tool to achieve the target  
Fe concentration. Overexpression of other genes involved in Fe homeostasis needs  
to be explored. Special attention needs to be given to the possible yield decrease in  
transgenic plants. Fine-tuning the expression of the genes by choosing a moderate  
constitutive  promoter  or  tissue-  and/or  stage-specific  promoter  may  need  to  be  
tested to avoid any yield penalty. 

----------------------- Page 490-----------------------

482                                                                                  J. M. Matres et al. 

References 

APHIS (2020) Movement of certain genetically engineered organisms. 85 FR 29790. Federal reg- 
    ister document: 2020-10638. APHIS, Riverdale, MD 
Aung MS, Masuda H, Kobayashi T, Nakanishi H, Yamakawa T, Nishizawa NK (2013) Iron bio- 
    fortification of Myanmar rice. Front Plant Sci 4:158. https://doi.org/10.3389/fpls.2013.00158 
Banakar R, Alvarez Fernández Á, Abadía J, Capell T, Christou P (2017a) The expression of heter- 
    ologous Fe (III) phytosiderophore transporter HvYS1 in rice increases Fe uptake,  translocation  
    and  seed  loading  and  excludes  heavy  metals  by  selective  Fe  transport.  Plant  Biotechnol  J  
    15(4):423–432. https://doi.org/10.1111/pbi.12637 
Banakar  R,  Alvarez  Fernandez  A,  Díaz-Benito  P,  Abadia  J,  Capell  T,  Christou  P  (2017b)  
    Phytosiderophores  determine  thresholds  for  iron  and  zinc  accumulation  in  biofortified  rice  
    endosperm  while  inhibiting  the  accumulation  of  cadmium.  J  Exp  Bot  68(17):4983–4995.  
    https://doi.org/10.1093/jxb/erx304 
Bashir K, Inoue H, Nagasaka S, Takahashi M, Nakanishi H, Mori S, Nishizawa NK (2006) Cloning  
    and characterization of deoxymugineic acid synthase genes from graminaceous plants. J Biol  
    Chem 281:32395. https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M604133200 
Bashir K, Takahashi R, Akhtar S, Ishimaru Y, Nakanishi H, Nishizawa NK (2013) The knockdown  
    of OsVIT2 and MIT affects iron localization in rice seed. Rice 6:31.  https://doi.org/10.118 
    6/1939- 8433- 6- 31 
Bashir  K,  Nozoye T,  Nagasaka  S,  Rasheed  S,  Miyauchi  N,  Seki  M  et  al  (2017)  Paralogs  and  
    mutants show that one DMA synthase functions in iron homeostasis in rice. J Exp Bot 68:1785.  
    https://doi.org/10.1093/jxb/erx065 
Boonyaves  K,  Gruissem  W,  Bhullar  NK  (2016)  NOD  promoter-controlled AtIRT1  expression  
    functions synergistically with NAS and FERRITIN genes to increase iron in rice grains. Plant  
    Mol Biol 90(3):207–215. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11103- 015- 0404- 0 
Boonyaves  K,  Wu  TY,  Gruissem  W,  Bhullar  NK  (2017)  Enhanced  grain  iron  levels  in  iron-  
    regulated metal transporter, nicotianamine synthase, and ferritin gene cassette. Front Plant Sci  
    8:130. https://doi.org/10.3389/fpls.2017.00130 
Borrill P, Connorton JM, Balk J, Miller AJ, Sanders D, Uauy C (2014) Biofortification of wheat  
    grain  with  iron  and  zinc:  integrating  novel  genomic  resources  and  knowledge  from  model  
    crops. Front Plant Sci 5:53. https://doi.org/10.3389/fpls.2014.00053 
Bouis HE, Saltzman A (2017) Improving nutrition through biofortification: a review of evidence  
    from HarvestPlus, 2003 through 2016. Glob Food Secur 12:49–58. https://doi.org/10.1016/J. 
    GFS.2017.01.009 
Bouis HE, Hotz C, McClafferty B, Meenakshi JV, Pfeiffer WH (2011) Biofortification: a new tool  
    to reduce micronutrient malnutrition. Food Nutr Bull 32(1 Suppl 1):S31–S40. https://doi.org/1 
    0.1177/15648265110321S105 
Cailliatte R, Schikora A, Briat JF, Mari S, Curie C (2010) High-affinity manganese uptake by the  
    metal transporter nramp1 is essential for Arabidopsis growth in low manganese conditions.  
    Plant Cell 22:904. https://doi.org/10.1105/tpc.109.073023 
Che J, Yokosho K, Yamaji N, Ma JF (2019) A vacuolar phytosiderophore transporter alters iron  
    and  zinc  accumulation  in  polished  rice  grains.  Plant  Physiol  181(1):276–288.  https://doi. 
    org/10.1104/pp.19.00598 
Connorton JM, Balk J, Rodríguez-Celma J (2017) Iron homeostasis in plants: a brief overview.  
    Metallomics 9(7):813–823. https://doi.org/10.1039/C7MT00136C 
Curie  C,  Panaviene  Z,  Loulergue  C,  Dellaporta  SL,  Briat  JF, Walker  EL  (2001)  Maize  yellow  
    stripe1  encodes  a  membrane  protein  directly  involved  in  Fe(III)  uptake.  Nature  409:346.  
    https://doi.org/10.1038/35053080 
Curie C, Cassin G, Couch D, Divol F, Higuchi K, Le Jean M et al (2009) Metal movement within  
    the plant: contribution of nicotianamine and yellow stripe 1-like transporters. Ann Bot 103:1.  
    https://doi.org/10.1093/aob/mcn207 

----------------------- Page 491-----------------------

Biofortification of Rice Grains for Increased Iron Content                                              483 

Díaz-Benito  P,  Banakar  R,  Rodríguez-Menéndez  S,  Capell T,  Pereiro  R,  Christou  P, Abadia  J,  
    Fernández B, Álvarez-Fernández A (2018) Iron and zinc in the embryo and endosperm of rice  
    (Oryza sativa L.) seeds in contrasting 2′-deoxymugineic acid/nicotianamine scenarios. Front  
    Plant Sci 9:1190. https://doi.org/10.3389/fpls.2018.01190 
Drakakaki G, Christou P, Stöger E (2000) Constitutive expression of soybean ferritin cDNA in  
    transgenic wheat and rice results in increased iron levels in vegetative tissues but not in seeds.  
    Transgenic Res 9:445. https://doi.org/10.1023/A:1026534009483 
Eide D, Broderius M, Fett J, Guerinot ML (1996) A novel iron-regulated metal transporter from  
    plants identified by functional expression in yeast. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 93:5624. https:// 
    doi.org/10.1073/pnas.93.11.5624 
Friedrichs  S,  Takasu  Y,  Kearns  P,  Dagallier  B,  Oshima  R,  Schofield  J,  Moreddu  C  (2019)  
    Meeting report of the OECD conference on “Genome Editing: Applications in Agriculture— 
    Implications  for  Health,  Environment  and  Regulation”.  Transgenic  Res  28(3–4):419–463.  
    https://doi.org/10.1007/s11248- 019- 00154- 1 
Garcia-Oliveira AL, Chander S, Ortiz R, Menkir A, Gedil M (2018) Genetic basis and breeding  
    perspectives of grain iron and zinc enrichment in cereals. Front Plant Sci 9:937.  https://doi. 
    org/10.3389/fpls.2018.00937 
Goto F, Yoshihara T, Shigemoto N, Toki S, Takaiwa F (1999) Iron fortification of rice seed by the  
    soybean ferritin gene. Nat Biotechnol 17(3):282–286. https://doi.org/10.1038/7029 
Gregorio G, Senadhira D, Htut T (1999) Improving iron and zinc value of rice for human nutrition.  
    Agric Dév 23:77–81 
Guerinot  ML  (2000)  The  ZIP  family  of  metal  transporters.  Biochim  Biophys Acta  Biomembr  
    1465:190. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0005- 2736(00)00138- 3 
HarvestPlus (n.d.). https://www.harvestplus.org/. Accessed 14 Jul 2020 
Higuchi K, Suzuki K, Nakanishi H, Yamaguchi H, Nishizawa NK, Mori S (1999) Cloning of nico- 
    tianamine synthase genes, novel genes involved in the biosynthesis of phytosiderophores. Plant  
    Physiol 119(2):471–479. https://doi.org/10.1104/pp.119.2.471 
Hoa TTC, Lan NTP (2004) Effect of milling technology on iron content in rice grains of some  
    leading varieties in the Mekong delta. Omonrice 12:38–44 
Inoue H, Mizuno D, Nakanishi H, Mori S, Takahashi M, Nishizawa NK (2004) A rice FRD3-like  
    (OsFRDL1) gene is expressed in the cells involved in long-distance transport. Soil Sci Plant  
    Nutr 50:1133. https://doi.org/10.1080/00380768.2004.10408586 
Inoue H, Kobayashi T, Nozoye T, Takahashi M, Kakei Y, Suzuki K et al (2009) Rice OsYSL15  
    is  an  iron-regulated  iron  (III)-deoxymugineic  acid  transporter  expressed  in  the  roots  and  is  
    essential for iron uptake in early growth of the seedlings. J Biol Chem 284:3470. https://doi. 
    org/10.1074/jbc.M806042200 
Ishimaru Y, Suzuki M, Tsukamoto T, Suzuki K, Nakazono M, Kobayashi T et al (2006) Rice plants  
    take up iron as an Fe 3+ -phytosiderophore and as Fe 2+. Plant J 45(3):335–346. https://doi. 
    org/10.1111/j.1365- 313X.2005.02624.x 
Ishimaru Y, Masuda H, Bashir K, Inoue H, Tsukamoto T, Takahashi M et al (2010) Rice metal-  
    nicotianamine  transporter,  OsYSL2,  is  required  for  the  long-distance  transport  of  iron  and  
    manganese. Plant J 62(3):379–390. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1365- 313X.2010.04158.x 
James SL, Abate D, Abate KH, Abay SM, Abbafati C, Abbasi N et al (2018) Global, regional, and  
    national incidence, prevalence, and years lived with disability for 354 diseases and injuries  
    for 195 countries and territories, 1990-2017: a systematic analysis for the Global Burden of  
    Disease Study 2017. Lancet 392:1789. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0140- 6736(18)32279- 7 
Johnson AAT, Kyriacou B, Callahan DL, Carruthers L, Stangoulis J, Lombi E, Tester M (2011)  
    Constitutive overexpression of the OsNAS gene family reveals single-gene strategies for effec- 
    tive  iron-  and  zinc-biofortification  of  rice  endosperm.  PLoS  One  6(9):e24476.  https://doi. 
    org/10.1371/journal.pone.0024476 
Khalekuzzaman M, Datta K, Oliva N, Alam MF, Joarder OI, Datta SK (2006) Stable integration,  
    expression and inheritance of the ferritin gene in transgenic elite indica rice cultivar BR29 with  
    enhanced iron level in the endosperm. Indian J Biotechnol 5:26 

----------------------- Page 492-----------------------

484                                                                                     J. M. Matres et al. 

Kim  SA,  Guerinot  ML  (2007)  Mining  iron:  iron  uptake  and  transport  in  plants.  FEBS  Lett  
    581:2273. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.febslet.2007.04.043 
Kobayashi T, Nishizawa NK (2012) Iron uptake, translocation, and regulation in higher plants.  
    Annu Rev Plant Biol 63:131. https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev- arplant- 042811- 105522 
Kobayashi T, Suzuki M, Inoue H, Itai RN, Takahashi M, Nakanishi H et al (2005) Expression  
    of  iron-acquisition-related  genes  in  iron-deficient  rice  is  co-ordinately  induced  by  partially  
    conserved  iron-deficiency-responsive  elements.  J  Exp  Bot  56:1305.  https://doi.org/10.1093/ 
    jxb/eri131 
Kobayashi  T,  Ozu  A,  Kobayashi  S,  An  G,  Jeon  JS,  Nishizawa  NK  (2019)  OsbHLH058  and  
    OsbHLH059 transcription factors positively regulate iron deficiency responses in rice. Plant  
    Mol Biol 101:471. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11103- 019- 00917- 8 
Koike S, Inoue H, Mizuno D, Takahashi M, Nakanishi H, Mori S, Nishizawa NK (2004) OsYSL2  
    is a rice metal-nicotianamine transporter that is regulated by iron and expressed in the phloem.  
    Plant J 39(3):415–424. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1365- 313X.2004.02146.x 
Lanquar V, Lelièvre F, Bolte S, Hamès C, Alcon C, Neumann D et al (2005) Mobilization of vacu- 
    olar iron by AtNRAMP3 and AtNRAMP4 is essential for seed germination on low iron. EMBO  
    J 24:4041. https://doi.org/10.1038/sj.emboj.7600864 
Lee S, An G (2009) Over-expression of OsIRT1 leads to increased iron and zinc accumulations in  
    rice. Plant Cell Environ 32:408. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1365- 3040.2009.01935.x 
Lee S, Chiecko JC, Kim SA, Walker EL, Lee Y, Guerinot ML, An G (2009a) Disruption of OsYSL15  
    leads  to  iron  inefficiency  in  rice  plants.  Plant  Physiol  150:786.  https://doi.org/10.1104/ 
    pp.109.135418 
Lee S, Jeon US, Lee SJ, Kim Y-K, Persson DP, Husted S et al (2009b) Iron fortification of rice  
    seeds  through  activation  of  the  nicotianamine  synthase  gene.  Proc  Natl  Acad  Sci  U  S  A  
    106(51):22014–22019. https://doi.org/10.1073/PNAS.0910950106 
Lee S, Kim YS, Jeon US, Kim YK, Schjoerring JK, An G (2012) Activation of rice nicotianamine  
    synthase 2 (OsNAS2) enhances iron availability for biofortification. Mol Cell 33(3):269–275.  
    https://doi.org/10.1007/s10059- 012- 2231- 3 
Lucca P, Hurrell R, Potrykus I (2002) Fighting iron deficiency anemia with iron-rich rice. J Am  
    Coll Nutr 21:184S–190S. https://doi.org/10.1080/07315724.2002.10719264 
Martínez  C,  Borrero  J,  Taboada  R,  Viana  J,  Neves  P,  Narvaez  L  et  al  (2010)  Rice  cultivars  
    with enhanced iron and zinc content to improve human nutrition. In: Presented at the 28th  
    International Rice Research Conference, 8–12 November 2010. Hanoi, Vietnam 
Masuda H, Usuda K, Kobayashi T, Ishimaru Y, Kakei Y, Takahashi M et al (2009) Overexpression  
    of the barley nicotianamine synthase gene HvNAS1 increases iron and zinc concentrations in  
    rice grains. Rice 2(4):155–166. https://doi.org/10.1007/s12284- 009- 9031- 1 
Masuda H, Ishimaru Y, Aung MS, Kobayashi T, Kakei Y, Takahashi M et al (2012) Iron bioforti- 
    fication in rice by the introduction of multiple genes involved in iron nutrition. Sci Rep 2:543.  
    https://doi.org/10.1038/srep00543 
Masuda  H,  Kobayashi T,  Ishimaru Y, Takahashi  M, Aung  MS,  Nakanishi  H  et  al  (2013)  Iron-  
    biofortification  in  rice  by  the  introduction  of  three  barley  genes  participated  in  mugineic  
    acid biosynthesis with soybean ferritin gene. Front Plant Sci 4:132. https://doi.org/10.3389/ 
    fpls.2013.00132 
Mayer JE, Pfeiffer WH, Beyer P (2008) Biofortified crops to alleviate micronutrient malnutrition.  
    Curr Opin Plant Biol 11:166. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pbi.2008.01.007 
Mumm RH (2013) A look at product development with genetically modified crops: examples from  
    maize. J Agric Food Chem 61:8254. https://doi.org/10.1021/jf400685y 
Nozoye T, Nagasaka S, Kobayashi T, Takahashi M, Sato Y, Sato Y et al (2011) Phytosiderophore  
    efflux  transporters  are  crucial  for  iron  acquisition  in  graminaceous  plants.  J  Biol  Chem  
    286:5446. https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M110.180026 
Nozoye T, Nagasaka S, Kobayashi T, Sato Y, Uozumi N, Nakanishi H, Nishizawa NK (2015) The  
    phytosiderophore efflux transporter TOM2 is involved in metal transport in rice. J Biol Chem  
    290(46):27688–27699. https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M114.635193 

----------------------- Page 493-----------------------

Biofortification of Rice Grains for Increased Iron Content                                                  485 

Ogo Y, Itai RN, Kobayashi T, Aung MS, Nakanishi H, Nishizawa NK (2011) OsIRO2 is respon- 
    sible for iron utilization in rice and improves growth and yield in calcareous soil. Plant Mol  
    Biol 75:593-605. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11103- 011- 9752- 6 
Oliva N, Chadha-Mohanty P, Poletti S, Abrigo E, Atienza G, Torrizo L et al (2014) Large-scale  
    production and evaluation of marker-free indica rice IR64 expressing phytoferritin genes. Mol  
    Breed 33:23. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11032- 013- 9931- z 
Paul S, Ali N, Gayen D, Datta SK, Datta K (2012) Molecular breeding of Osfer 2 gene to increase  
    iron nutrition in rice grain. GM Crops Food 3(4):310–316. https://doi.org/10.4161/gmcr.22104 
Paul S, Ali N, Datta SK, Datta K (2014) Development of an iron-enriched high-yielding indica rice  
    cultivar by introgression of a high-iron trait from transgenic iron-biofortified rice. Plant Foods  
    Hum Nutr 69:203. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11130- 014- 0431- z 
Qu LQ, Yoshihara T, Ooyama A, Goto F, Takaiwa F (2005) Iron accumulation does not paral- 
    lel the high expression level of ferritin in transgenic rice seeds. Planta 222:225.  https://doi. 
    org/10.1007/s00425- 005- 1530- 8 
Robinson NJ, Procter CM, Connolly EL, Guerinot ML (1999) A ferric-chelate reductase for iron  
    uptake from soils. Nature 397:694. https://doi.org/10.1038/17800 
Senoura T, Sakashita E, Kobayashi T, Takahashi M, Aung MS, Masuda H et al (2017) The iron-  
    chelate transporter OsYSL9 plays a role in iron distribution in developing rice grains. Plant  
    Mol Biol 95(4–5):375–387. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11103- 017- 0656- y 
Singh   SP,   Gruissem   W,   Bhullar   NK   (2017)   Single   genetic   locus   improvement   of   iron,  
    zinc  and  β-carotene  content  in  rice  grains.  Sci  Rep  7(1):6883.  https://doi.org/10.1038/ 
    s41598- 017- 07198- 5 
Slamet-Loedin  IH,  Johnson-Beebout  SE,  Impa  S,  Tsakirpaloglou  N  (2015)  Enriching  rice  
    with  Zn  and  Fe  while  minimizing  Cd  risk.  Front  Plant  Sci  6:1–9.  https://doi.org/10.3389/ 
    fpls.2015.00121 
Stoltzfus RJ (2001) Iron-deficiency anemia: reexamining the nature and magnitude of the public  
    health problem. J Nutr 131:697S–700S 
Suzuki  M,  Takahashi  M,  Tsukamoto  T,  Watanabe  S,  Matsuhashi  S,  Yazaki  J  et  al  (2006)  
    Biosynthesis and secretion of mugineic acid family phytosiderophores in zinc-deficient barley.  
    Plant J 48:85. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1365- 313X.2006.02853.x 
Suzuki   M,   Morikawa   KC,   Nakanishi   H,   Takahashi   M,   Saigusa   M,   Mori   S,   Nishizawa  
    NK  (2008)  Transgenic  rice  lines  that  include  barley  genes  have  increased  tolerance  to  
    low  iron  availability  in  a  calcareous  paddy  soil.  Soil  Sci  Plant  Nutr  54:77.  https://doi. 
    org/10.1111/j.1747- 0765.2007.00205.x 
Takahashi M, Yamaguchi H, Nakanishi H, Shioiri T, Nishizawa NK, Mori S (1999) Cloning two  
    genes for nicotianamine aminotransferase, a critical enzyme in iron acquisition (strategy II) in  
    graminaceous plants. Plant Physiol 121:947. https://doi.org/10.1104/pp.121.3.947 
Trijatmiko  KR,  Dueñas  C,  Tsakirpaloglou  N,  Torrizo  L,  Arines  FM,  Adeva  C  et  al  (2016)  
    Biofortified  indica  rice  attains  iron  and  zinc  nutrition  dietary  targets  in  the  field.  Sci  Rep  
    6:19792. https://doi.org/10.1038/srep19792 
Vasconcelos M, Datta K, Oliva N, Khalekuzzaman M, Torrizo L, Krishnan S et al (2003) Enhanced  
    iron and zinc accumulation in transgenic rice with the ferritin gene. Plant Sci 164:371. https:// 
    doi.org/10.1016/S0168- 9452(02)00421- 1 
Virk P, Barry G, Das A, Lee J, Tan J (2006) Research status of micronutrient rice development  
    in Asia. In: Proceedings of the International Symposium on Rice Biofortification: Improving  
    Human Health Through Biofortified Rice, 15 September 2006, Suwon, Korea, pp 123–148 
Virk  P,  Barry  G,  Bouis  H  (2007)  Genetic  enhancement  for  the  nutritional  quality  of  rice.  In:  
    Genetic enhancement for the nutritional quality of rice. Proceedings of the 26th International  
    Rice Research Conference, 9–12 October 2006. Macmillan India Ltd, New Delhi, pp 279–285 
WHO (2002) The world health report 2002, vol 16. World Health Organization, Geneva 
WHO/FAO (2004) Vitamin and mineral requirements in human nutrition, 2nd edn. WHO, Geneva.  
    https://doi.org/10.1128/AAC.03728- 14 

----------------------- Page 494-----------------------

486                                                                                   J. M. Matres et al. 

Wirth J, Poletti S, Aeschlimann B, Yakandawala N, Drosse B, Osorio S et al (2009) Rice endo- 
    sperm iron biofortification by targeted and synergistic action of nicotianamine synthase and  
    ferritin. Plant Biotechnol J 7:631. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1467- 7652.2009.00430.x 
Wu TY, Gruissem W, Bhullar NK (2018) Facilitated citrate-dependent iron translocation increases  
    rice  endosperm  iron  and  zinc  concentrations.  Plant  Sci  270:13.  https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
    plantsci.2018.02.002 
Wu TY, Gruissem W, Bhullar NK (2019) Targeting intracellular transport combined with efficient  
    uptake and storage significantly increases grain iron and zinc levels in rice. Plant Biotechnol J  
    17(1):9–20. https://doi.org/10.1111/pbi.12943 
Yokosho K, Yamaji N, Ueno D, Mitani N, Jian FM (2009) OsFRDL1 is a citrate transporter required  
    for  efficient  translocation  of  iron  in  rice.  Plant  Physiol  149:297.  https://doi.org/10.1104/ 
    pp.108.128132 
Yoneyama T, Ishikawa S, Fujimaki S, Yoneyama T, Ishikawa S, Fujimaki S (2015) Route and regu- 
    lation of zinc, cadmium, and iron transport in rice plants (Oryza sativa L.) during vegetative  
    growth and grain filling: metal transporters, metal speciation, grain Cd reduction and Zn and  
    Fe biofortification. Int J Mol Sci 16(8):19111–19129. https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms160819111 
Zhang Y, Xu YH, Yi HY, Gong JM (2012) Vacuolar membrane transporters OsVIT1 and OsVIT2  
    modulate iron translocation between flag leaves and seeds in rice. Plant J 72:400. https://doi. 
    org/10.1111/j.1365- 313X.2012.05088.x 
Zhang C, Shinwari KI, Luo L, Zheng L (2018) OsYSL13 is involved in iron distribution in rice. Int  
    J Mol Sci 19:3537. https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms19113537 
Zheng L, Cheng Z, Ai C, Jiang X, Bei X, Zheng Y et al (2010) Nicotianamine, a novel enhancer  
    of rice iron bioavailability to humans. PLoS One 5(4):e10190. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal. 
    pone.0010190 

Open Access    This chapter is licensed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution 4.0  
International License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/), which permits use, sharing,  
adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give appropriate  
credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons license and  
indicate if changes were made. 
    The images or other third party material in this chapter are included in the chapter's Creative  
Commons license, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not  
included in the chapter's Creative Commons license and your intended use is not permitted by  
statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from  
the copyright holder. 

----------------------- Page 495-----------------------

Correction to: Crop Establishment   
in Direct-Seeded Rice: Traits,   
Physiology, and Genetics 

Fergie Ann Quilloy, Benedick Labaco, Carlos Casal Jr, and Shalabh Dixit 

 Correction to:   
Chapter 6 in: J. Ali, S. H. Wani (eds.), Rice Improvement,   
https://doi.org/10.1007/978- 3- 030- 66530- 2_6 

“Owing to an error on the part of the editor and corresponding chapter author, the  
author  sequence  in  the  chapter  opening  page  of  chapter  Crop  Establishment  in  
Direct-Seeded Rice: Traits, Physiology, and Genetics was presented wrongly. The  
author sequence has now been updated to be Fergie Ann Quilloy, Benedick Labaco,  
Carlos Casal Jr., Shalabh Dixit in the chapter opening page, table of contents, and  
wherever applicable throughout the book.” 

The updated version of this chapter can be found at   
https://doi.org/10.1007/978- 3- 030- 66530- 2_6 

© The Author(s) 2021                                                                     C1 
J. Ali, S. H. Wani (eds.), Rice Improvement,  
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-66530-2_15 

----------------------- Page 496-----------------------

Index 

A                                                           ethylene, 181 
ABA-responsive element (ABRE), 82                           expression analysis, 181 
Abiotic stresses, 9, 12, 17–19, 253                         genetic factors, 182, 183, 185 
Abscisic acid (ABA), 75, 181, 229, 253, 289                 genotypes, 179, 180 
Acaryochloris , 43                                          hypoxia, 181 
Acetolactate synthase gene (OsALS), 21                      hypoxic conditions, 178 
Adenosine triphosphate (ATP), 178                           matrix polysaccharides, 182 
ADP glucose pyrophosphorylase                               mechanism of action, 180 
           (ADPGPPase), 11                                  nonenzymatic proteins, 182 
Advanced yield trial (AYT), 130                             O2 concentration, 179 
Aeluropus littoralis , 228                                  water stress, 179 
Aerobic rice development, 154                           rice genotypes, 178 
Agronomic nutrient management (ANM)                     seed longevity 
           system, 352                                      crop yield, 186 
Agronomic traits, 456                                       genetic factors, 187, 188 
Alcohol dehydrogenase (ADH), 181                            life cycle, 186 
Alcoholic fermentation (AF) pathway, 178                    nongenetic factors, 186 
Aldehyde dehydrogenase (ALDH), 181                          physiology and molecular mechanisms,  
Allium sativum , 406                                           186, 187 
Alternate wetting and drying (AWD), 153,                    rice varieties, 186 
           303, 461                                     seedling vigor 
Amiprophos-methyl (APM), 431                                crop establishment, 188 
Anaerobic germination (AG)                                  genetic factors, 190, 193 
    breeding rice, 193–195                                  physiology and molecular mechanisms,  
    crop establishment, 178                                    188, 190 
    physiology and molecular mechanisms                     soil/water, 188 
       AF, 178                                              weed competition, 188 
        amylases, 180                                   seeds, 178 
        anaerobic response index, 178                   weed control mechanism, 178 
        anoxia, 178–181                             Androgenesis, 426–430, 436, 442 
       ATPs, 178                                    Anther culture, 426, 427, 429–431, 434, 436,  
       carbohydrate, 180                                       437, 441, 442 
       carbon, 181                                  Antioxidant enzymes, 186 
       cellulose microfibrils, 182                  Antioxidant polyphenols, 187 
       efficient water imbibition, 180              Antioxidant production, 186 
       energy, 181                                  Apparent amylose content (AAC), 133 

© The Author(s) 2021                                                                             487 
J. Ali, S. H. Wani (eds.), Rice Improvement,  
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-66530-2 

----------------------- Page 497-----------------------

488                                                                                              Index 

Arabidopsis phytochrome , 8                          Atmospheric CO2 concentrations, 35 
Arabidopsis , 37, 44, 47, 48, 187, 245, 473          Atmospheric methane, 173 
Arsenic contamination, 287, 302, 303, 305            ATP-binding cassette (ABC) transporter, 300 
Arsenic-induced toxicity symptoms 
    germination, 289, 291 
    reproductive growth, 291, 292                    B 
    vegetative growth, 291                           Bacillus thuringiensis, 15, 16, 400 
Arsenic speciation, 288, 305                         Backcross-selective introgression lines  
Arsenic stress responses                                         (EB-SILs), 63, 81 
    arsenate uptake, 297                             Bacterial blight (BB), 321, 322 
    arsenite uptake, 295, 296                        Bacterial leaf streak (BLS), 325, 350 
    biological function, 299                         Bangladesh Rice Research Institute  
    biological system, 284                                       (BRRI), 302 
    biotic and abiotic stresses, 282                 Bayesian network analysis, 456 
    cereal crop, 282                                 Biochemical factors, 187 
    climate change, 283                              Biochemical mechanisms, 473 
    detoxification, 299                              Biofortification, 438, 439, 450 
    enzymatic reduction, 299                             agronomic traits, 481 
    factors, 295                                         conventional plant breeding, 472, 473 
    food demand, 283                                     endogenous genes, 481 
    global food security, 283                            Fe concentration, 472, 480, 481 
    grain and straw, 283                                 genetic engineering, 475, 480 
    groundwater, 283                                     genetically modified (GM) crops, 480 
    growth stages, 290                                   genome editing, 481 
    health-related concerns, 283                         genome editing technology, 481 
    heavy metal contamination, 283, 285                  genome-edited crops, 481 
    human agricultural advancement, 282                  homozygous condition, 481 
    mitigation strategies, 303, 304                      iron deficiency, 472 
    oxidative stress response, 300, 301                  iron uptake, 473, 475 
    paddy soil                                           micronutrient deficiency, 472 
        climate change, 286                              molecular characterization, 481 
        fungicides, 286                                  multi-location and multi-season field  
        groundwater, 286                                         trials, 481 
        pesticides, 286                                  nutritional deficiency, 472 
        plant nutrients, 288                             nutritional traits, 481 
        rice ecosystem, 287, 288                         transgenic plants, 481 
        subsurface mobilization, 286                     translocation, 473, 475 
        surface water, 286                           Biofortification Priority Index, 451 
    QTL, 292–294                                     Bioinformatics 
    rainfed ecosystem, 282                               AI, 362 
    rice production and consumers, 282                   datasets, 360 
    rice-growing environments, 288                       genome databases, 360 
    root epidermis and exodermis, 299                    GWAS, 361 
    root plaque formation, 301, 302                      mapping QTLs and genes, 361 
    state of knowledge gaps, 302, 303                    ML, 362 
    translocation, 296–298                               scientific community, 360 
    uptake and storage, 298                              speeding up breeding, 362 
    worldwide distribution, 287                          whole-genome sequence, 360 
Arthrobacter globiformis , 18                        Biological system, 284 
Artificial genome doubling, 431                      Biophysical stresses, 12 
Artificial intelligence (AI), 362                    Biosynthesis, 41 
Ascorbate peroxidase (APEX), 229                     Biotic processes, 204 
Asian rice gall midge (ARGM), 381                    Biotic stress, 12, 13, 78, 79 

----------------------- Page 498-----------------------

Index                                                                                            489 

Bipolaris oryzae, 353                               Cold-stress response, 257 
Blast disease, 322                                  Cold-tolerant genotypes, 262 
Breeding approaches                                 Comparative transcriptome analysis, 256 
    genetic transformation, 264, 265                Conventional breeding-selection  
    genome editing, 265, 266                                   approaches, 15 
    LTS tolerance, 261–263                          Conventional plant breeding, 472, 473 
    plant breeders, 261                             Critical sterility temperature point  
    SIB, 263, 264                                              (CSTP), 111 
    strategies, 261                                     controlled-temperature screening  
Breeding rice, 193–195                                         conditions, 113 
Breeding strategies, 346, 347                           field screening, 113, 114 
Broad-spectrum resistance genes, 351, 352               seed production, 113 
Brown planthopper (BPH), 16, 436                        sequential seeding, 113, 114 
                                                        temperatures, 112 
                                                        tracking technique, 112 
C                                                   Crop plants, 5 
Calcineurin B-like protein kinase                   Crop protection, 396 
           (CIPK15), 181                            Crop simulation models, 173–174 
Callus, 427–431                                     Crystalline, 400 
Calmodulin-binding transcription activators         Culture technology, 437 
           (CAMTAs), 253                            Cumulative drought stress response index  
Calvin–Benson-Cycle enzymes, 40, 41                            (CDSRI), 151 
Candidate gene cloning, 408                         Cyanobacterium, 33 
Carbohydrates, 8                                    Cyclic electron transport, 42 
Carbon concentrating mechanism (CCM), 39            Cytokinin biosynthesis, 257 
Carboxysome, 40                                     Cytoplasmic male sterile (CMS), 3, 100, 440 
Catalase (CAT), 229 
Cellular metabolic activities, 186 
Cell-wall components, 353                           D 
CFTP, see Critical sterility temperature            Damage-associated molecular patterns  
           point (CSTP)                                        (DAMPs), 348 
Characterization-based approach, 408                Datura innoxia, 427 
Chemosensory protein (CSP) genes, 398               Defense-related genes (DR), 348 
Chloroplast, 49, 50                                 Deoxymugineic acid synthase (DMAS)  
Chloroplast electron transport capacity, 42                    enzymes, 473 
Chromosome, 253                                     Designed QTL pyramiding (DQP), 65, 81, 85 
Chromosome segment substitution lines               Differentially accumulated proteins  
           (CSSLs), 395                                        (DAPs), 121 
Climate change, 173–176, 204, 205                   Differentially expressed genes (DEGs), 257 
Climatic environments, 205                          Dimethylarsinic acid (DMA), 288 
Clustered regularly interspaced short               Dioscorea batatas, 406 
           palindromic repeats (CRISPR), 21,        Direct-seeded rice (DSR), 74, 303 
           356, 357                                     climate change, 173–176 
Clustered regularly interspaced short                   crop establishment, 173, 196 
           palindromic repeats/CRISPR-                  ecosystems, 172 
           associated protein (CRISPR/                  environment, 173 
           Cas), 265                                    rainfed areas, 172 
CO2 concentration, 32                                   rice production, 195 
CO  diffusion, 49, 502                                  topographical location, 172 
CO  transport, 32, 382                                  water and labor requirements, 195–196 
Cold stress (CS), 75                                    water scarcity, 173–176 
COLD1 gene, 254                                         water supply, 172 
Cold-responsive (COR) genes, 230, 245                   worldwide rice supply, 171 

----------------------- Page 499-----------------------

490                                                                                                Index 

Disease resistance                                        microspore development, 427, 429 
    breeding                                              microspore stage, 427 
        bacterial blight, 337, 344                        microspores, 430, 442 
        blast resistance, 344                             nitrogen composition, 429 
        broad-spectrum resistance, 337                    phenomics, 426 
        conventional breeding methods, 326                physiology, 427 
        disease-resistant cultivars, 326                  plant growth regulators, 429 
        DNA sequencing, 344                               ploidy analysis 
        gene-linked molecular markers, 337                    chromosome, 432 
        MABB, 344                                             cytological approach, 433 
        marker-assisted selection, 337                        flow cytometry, 433 
        MAS, 344                                              high-throughput cell analysis, 433 
        molecular markers, 337                                homozygous lines, 431 
        multiple disease, 346, 347                            molecular markers, 434 
        pathotypes, 337                                       morphological evaluation, 432 
        pyramiding, 345, 346                                  nuclear DNA content, 432 
        varieties, 346                                        pollen fertility analysis, 433 
    genetics, 325, 326 (see also Molecular                technology, 426 
           mechanisms)                                Double-stranded RNAs (dsRNA), 396 
Doubled-haploid (DH) approach, 125, 454               Drought, 149–152, 156, 157 
    advantages, 427 
    albinos, 430 
    androgenesis, 426, 427, 430                       E 
    application                                       Early seed germination (ESG), 74 
        biofortification, 438, 439                    Early seedling vigor (ESV), 74 
        cytoplasmic and nuclear genomes, 440          Eating and cooking quality (ECQ), 133 
        development, 437, 438                         Economic water scarcity, 174 
        food security, 434                            Effector-binding elements (EBEs), 358 
        gene stacking, 440                            Effector-triggered immunity (ETI), 348, 408 
        GS, 441                                       Efficient screening technologies, 352 
        hybrid rice, 434, 435                         Electron transport, 41–45, 47, 48 
        MAS, 441                                      Endogenous switching regression (ESR)  
        photosensitive rice genotypes, 434                        model, 86 
        QTLs, 435–437                                 Endomitosis, 431 
        reverse breeding, 440                         Environment-sensitive genic male sterility  
        transgenic research, 441                                  (EGMS), 4 
    basal media, 429                                  Enzymes, 451 
    biotechnological approaches, 427                  Erwinia uredovora, 20 
    breeding cycle, 426                               Escherichia coli, 161 
    carbohydrate source, 429                          Estimated Average Requirement (EAR), 472 
    chemical and physical factors, 428                Ethyl methane sulfonate (EMS), 320, 395 
    chromosome doubling, 427 
    conventional breeding, 427 
    crop improvement, 426, 427                        F 
    culture efficiency, 430                           Ferric-chelate oxidase 2 (FRO2), 473 
    factors, 427                                      Fertility-sterility alteration, 115 
    genomic regions, 442                              Flow cytometry, 433 
    genomics, 426                                     Food-based solutions, 452 
    gynogenesis, 426                                  Food security, 60 
    high-yielding rice cultivars, 426                 Free-air CO2 enrichment (FACE)  
    in vitro morphogenic responses, 430                           conditions, 41 
    indica rice, 426, 442                             Functional genetic units (FGUs), 84 
   japonica  cultivars, 426                           Fungicides, 286, 353 

----------------------- Page 500-----------------------

Index                                                                                            491 

G                                                       achievements, 86 
Galanthus nivalis agglutinin (GNA), 406                 advanced genotyping technology, 80 
Gall midge (GM), 16                                     alkalinity, 61 
Gelatinization temperature (GT), 133                    biotic and abiotic stress, 62 
Gel-based protein, 259                                  breeding and population  
Gene editing, 21                                               development, 63, 65 
Gene expression analysis, 264                           breeding strategy, 80 
Gene transfer, 399, 400, 407                            candidate genes, 68 
General combining ability (GCA), 130                    complex abiotic stress tolerances, 62 
Genes, 292, 293, 297, 300, 303, 304                     conventional and marker-assisted breeding  
Genetic basis, 473                                             approaches, 62 
Genetic breeding, 261                                   conventional breeding approaches, 62 
Genetic engineering, 406, 475, 480                      crop growth stages, 61 
Genetic modification (GM) technology, 320               crop yield, 61 
Genetic resources, 208, 209                             development, 62 
Genetic transformation, 264, 265                        distribution, 81 
Genetics, 325, 326                                      drought, 61 
Genome editing, 265, 266                                ecosystems, 62 
Genome editing approach, 398, 399                       food demand, 60 
Genome editing tools (GETs), 265                        food security, 60 
    biotic stress factors, 358, 359                     genetics 
    CRISPR, 356, 357                                        biotic and abiotic stresses, 67 
    disease resistance, 354                                 biotic stress, 78, 79 
    genome engineering, 354                                 drought tolerance, 67, 69, 70 
    introgress disease resistance, 354                      grain quality, 76–78 
    MNs, 355                                                LTS, 75, 76 
    nonbiotic stress-related phenotypes, 359                NUE, 73 
    ZFNs, 355, 356                                          QTLs and breeding materials, 67 
Genome-wide association studies (GWAS),                     salinity tolerance, 70, 71 
           183, 232, 255, 256, 361, 456                     submergence tolerance, 71, 72 
Genomic estimated breeding value (GEBV),                    weed-competitive (WC) ability  
           159, 457                                            traits, 74, 75 
Genomic resources, 256                                  genotyping technologies, 79 
Genomic selection (GS), 160, 441, 457                   grain quality, 62, 63 
Genomic tools, 17                                       green traits, 62, 63 
Genomics                                                growth of population, 60 
    genome editing approach, 398, 399                   list of donors, 66–67 
    RNAi approach, 396, 398                             marker-assisted selection, 80 
Genotyping by sequencing (GBS), 79                      marker-trait association studies, 81 
Germplasm enhancement, 459, 460                         molecular genetics, 63 
Gibberellic acid (GA), 181, 257, 289                    multiple stress tolerance, 79, 80, 82 
Global climate variability (GCV), 60, 222               multi-stress-tolerant varieties, 62 
Global warming, 204, 205                                nutritional and health benefits, 61 
Glutathione, 299                                        physiological mechanisms, 63 
Glutathione S-transferase (GST) genes, 397              physiological processes, 61 
Glycine decarboxylase (GDC), 37                         pyramiding QTLs, 80 
Glyoxalase, 36                                          QTLs, 68 
Grain, 472, 473, 475, 480, 481                          rainfed environments, 80 
Grain quality, 76–78, 437                               rice cultivars, 61 
Green Revolution (GR), 2, 3, 73, 173                    rice varieties, 64 
Green super rice (GSR), 9, 10, 264, 345                 soil salinity, 61 
    ABA signaling pathways, 82                          stresses, 61 
    abiotic stresses, 80                                stress-tolerance genes, 82 

----------------------- Page 501-----------------------

492                                                                                             Index 

Green super rice (GSR) (cont.)                       Hybrid Rice Development Consortium  
    stress-tolerant rice varieties, 61                          (HRDC), 100, 133 
    sustainable development programs, 60             Hybrid rice technology, 3, 4, 100 
    transcription factors, 82                        Hydrogen peroxide (H2O ), 3002 
Green traits, 62                                     Hyperplasia, 381 
    See also Green super rice (GSR)                  Hypersensitive reaction (HR), 348, 382, 408 
Greenhouse gases (GHG), 173, 204                     Hypertrophy, 381 

H                                                    I 
Haploidy diploidization                              Indian Council of Agricultural Research-  
    artificial genome doubling, 431                             National Rice Research Institute  
    spontaneous genome doubling, 431                            (ICAR-NRRI), 149 
HC-ATPase (HA) genes, 473                            Indole-2-acetic acid (IAA) homeostasis,  
Heat shock proteins (HSPs), 121                                 253, 257 
Heat tolerance                                       Inducer of CBF expression (ICE), 230 
    agricultural production, 204                     Inductively coupled plasma optical emission  
    breeding, 213, 214                                          spectrometry (ICP-OES), 458 
    climate change, 204, 205                         Industrial and urban sectors, 174 
    cultivars, 215                                   Infectious diseases, 353 
    cultural practices, 214                          Infrastructure, 174, 175 
    damage, 205, 206                                 Insect pest management 
    evaluation, 204                                      biotechnology, 381 
    genetic efforts, 215                                 biotic stress, 380 
    genetic resources, 208, 209                          chronic injuries, 380 
    genetics, 211, 212                                   dsRNA resistance, 410 
    genotypic and morphological                          feeding guilds, 380 
           characters, 215                               genomic level 
    global warming, 204, 205                                planthopper genomes, 407 
    marker-assisted gene, 215                               rice-gall midge interactions,   
    marker-assisted recurrent selection, 215                    408, 409 
    physiology, 209–211                                     rice-planthopper interactions, 408 
    plant hormones, 214                                  global warming, 380 
    reproductive stages, 204                             host-plant resistance, 380 
    rice, 206–208                                        immune-level R-genes, 410 
    rice germplasm, 214                                  molecular approaches, 410 
    rice production, 205, 206                            molecular biology, 381 
Helicoverpa armigera, 398                                molecular marker-based approaches, 381 
Herbicides, 286                                          pesticides, 410 
High temperature, 204–210, 212, 214                      production environments, 380 
High-throughput cell analysis, 433                       resistance genes, 385–388, 390, 392 
Host-plant resistance, 15                                rice crop, 410 
Host-plant resistance gene deployment                    rice ecosystem, 380 
    classical breeding methods, 381                      siRNA approach, 397 
    crambidae, 395                                       stem borers, 380 
    diopsidae, 395                                       transgenes, 401–406 
    gall midge, 381, 382, 394                            transgenic approach, 399, 400, 407 
    leafhoppers, 394, 395                            Insect pests, 15, 16 
    noctuidae, 395                                   Insect-plant interaction, 407–409 
    phenotypic selections, 381                       Inter-connected breeding (IB) population, 76 
    planthoppers, 394, 395                           Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change  
    resistance genes, 395                                       (IPCC), 60 
Host-plant resistance mechanism, 78                  International Center for Tropical Agriculture  
Human health, 285                                               (CIAT), 473 

----------------------- Page 502-----------------------

Index                                                                                          493 

International Rice Research Institute (IRRI), 2,       molecular and physiological levels, 230 
           100, 178, 206, 394, 451, 472                molecular marker technology, 227 
Interval mapping (IM), 185                             molecular mechanisms, 266 
Introgression lines (ILs), 71, 264                     natural cold-screening hotspots, 224 
Iron deficiency, 472                                   next-generation sequencing technology  
IRRI Genetic Resources Center, 182                            tools, 223 
Isopentyltransferase gene (IPT), 161                   omics-related technologies, 266 
                                                       OsNAC5 gene, 229 
                                                       phenotypic evaluation, 225 
L                                                      phenotypic techniques, 225 
Leafhoppers, 394, 395                                  photosynthetic activity, 227 
Lesion length (LL), 322                                photosynthetic process, 228 
Linear electron transport, 42                          physiological and biochemical  
Lipid peroxidation, 300                                       methods, 229 
Liquid chromatography coupled with tandem              physiological and metabolic activities, 230 
           mass spectrometry (LC-MS/                   plant growth period, 225 
           MS), 258                                    plant growth stages, 223 
Low-temperature stress (LTS), 75                       polymorphic SNPs, 267 
    abiotic stresses, 222                              protocols, 227 
    air temperature, 224                               PSII, 228 
    antioxidative enzymes, 229                         QTLs, 237 
    aquaporins, 229                                    reproductive stage, 224 
    biochemical parameters, 229                        rice production, 222 
    bioinformatics, 267                                rice varieties, 228 
    booting/flowering stage, 243, 244                  screening methods, 224 
    breeding varieties, 229                            seedling stage, 237, 241, 242 
    calcium signals, 230                               tolerance genes and stages, 246–252 
    cellular metabolism, 230                           water control, 223 
    chromosome, 236                                LOX3 gene, 21 
    cold stress, 229                               Lysine-rich protein (LRP), 15 
    cold-water screening, 224 
    colocalization, 238–241 
    crop growth stages, 223                        M 
    diverse ecosystems, 222                        Machine learning (ML), 362 
    food security, 222                             Magnaporthe oryzae, 13, 322 
    genetic and genomic resources, 223             Major resistance (MR) genes, 348 
    genomics, 266                                  Malnutrition, 450, 463 
    germination, 223, 224, 232, 235, 236           MAMP-triggered immunity (MTI), 348 
    growth stages, 224, 226–227,                   Marker-assisted backcross (MABC), 120, 126 
           233–235, 266                            Marker-assisted backcross breeding  
    GS-related traits, 232                                    (MABB), 344 
    high-elevation areas, 224                      Marker-assisted backcrossing (MAB),  
    high-throughput molecular                                 158, 254 
           approaches, 225                         Marker-assisted breeding (MAB), 18, 156, 394 
    high-throughput screening techniques,          Marker-assisted pyramiding, 158, 159 
           225, 227                                Marker-assisted recurrent selection  
    intracellular levels, 230                                 (MARS), 159 
    linolenic acid, 229                            Marker-assisted selection (MAS), 125, 158,  
    low-temperature stress (LTS)                              178, 320, 441 
       systems biology, 267                        Matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization  
    mechanisms, 230                                           (MALDI-TOF MS), 258 
    metabolome-wide association studies, 266       Meganucleases (MNs), 265, 355 
    metabolomics, 266                              Metabolite quantitative trait locus  
    metabolomics quantitative trait locus, 266                (mQTL), 261 

----------------------- Page 503-----------------------

494                                                                                            Index 

Metabolome-wide association studies                     MABC, 158 
           (MWAS), 261                                  marker-assisted pyramiding, 158, 159 
Metabolomics, 260, 261                                  MARS, 159 
Metal chelator, 475–480                                 MAS, 158 
Microarray studies, 408                                 proteins, 156 
Microbe-/pathogen-associated molecular                  QTL mapping, 156, 157 
           patterns (MAMPs/PAMPs), 348              Molecular genetic mechanisms, 302 
Micronutrient, 452, 472, 473                        Molecular level, 17 
Mitogen-activated protein (MAP) kinase              Molecular marker studies, 117 
           activity, 348                            Molecular markers, 337, 381, 394, 434 
Molecular approaches                                Molecular mechanisms, 120, 121 
    agricultural crop plants, 321                       bacterial blight, 349, 350 
    bacterial blight, 316, 327–331                      BLS, 350 
    BB, 321, 322                                        broad-spectrum resistance genes,   
    biotic disease resistance, 326, 352–354                    351, 352 
    biotic stresses, 316                                calcium-binding proteins, 245 
    blast disease, 322                                  cold-sensing calcium channel, 245 
    blast resistance genes, 332–337                     cold-stress conditions, 245 
    BLS, 325                                            defense mechanisms, 347 
    climatic conditions, 316                            elicitors, 349 
    conventional breeding methods, 316                  gene expression patterns, 245 
    crop protection, 316                                genes and transcription factors, 245 
    diseases, 316–319                                   GWAS, 255, 256 
    DNA markers, 320                                    innate immune system, 348 
    false smut, 324                                     metabolomics, 260, 261 
    food demand, 363                                    molecular patterns, 348 
    food security crop, 316                             molecules, 348 
    frequency of variations, 321                        pathogens, 347 
    gamma-rays (γ-rays), 320                            pathogen-specific factor, 348 
    genetic improvements, 363                           phosphorylation, 245 
    genome engineering technologies, 321                physiological and metabolic  
    genome-editing technologies, 321                           compounds, 245 
    genome-editing tools, 321                           plant resistance, 349 
    genomic-assisted breeding tools, 363                proteomics, 258, 259 
    genomics, 321                                       rice blast, 350 
    GM technology, 320                                  sheath blight, 351 
    management practices, 316                           signaling pathways, 253–255 
    methods, 316                                        transcription factors, 245 
    mutation breeding, 320                              transcriptomics, 256–258 
    nutrient fertilizers, 352–354                   Monomethylarsonic acid (MMA), 288 
    plant pathogens, 316                            Mugineic acid, 473 
    QTL, 320, 332–337                               Multienvironment trials (METs), 130 
    resistance, 320                                 Multi-parent Advanced Generation   
    R-genes, 320                                               Inter-Cross (MAGIC)-derived  
    rice cultivation, 316                                      lines, 452 
    rice grain yield, 316                           Multiple stress tolerance 
    sheath blight (ShB) disease, 316, 322, 323          breeding products, 84–86 
    sheath blight-resistance genes, 338–343             rice hybrids, 87 
    ShR, 323, 324                                       stress-regulated mechanisms, 82–84 
    techniques, 359, 360                            Multi-pronged approaches, 5 
    tungro disease, 324, 325                        Multi-trait and multi-environment (MTME)  
Molecular breeding                                             models, 457–458 
    antioxidants, 156                               Multi-trait genomic selection, 457, 458 
    GS, 160                                         Myeloblastosis (MYB), 257 

----------------------- Page 504-----------------------

Index                                                                                          495 

N                                                  Photorespiration, 11, 35, 37 
NADH dehydrogenase-like (NDH)                      Photosynthesis, 11, 12, 473 
           complex, 47                                 air temperature, 31 
NADH quinone oxidoreductase (NQO), 406                 Calvin–Benson-Cycle enzymes, 40, 41 
Natural resistance-associated macrophage               CO2 concentrations, 38–40 
           protein (NRAMP), 475                        crop productivity, 31 
Near-isogenic line (NIL), 8, 212, 435                  crop yield, 32 
New breeding techniques (NBT), 481                     electron transport, 41–44 
New plant type (NPT), 7, 8                             environmental conditions, 32 
Nicotiana tabacum, 37                                  greenhouse gases, 32 
Nicotianamine aminotransferase                         natural environments 
           (NAAT), 473                                     Calvin-Cycle enzymes, 48, 49 
Nicotianamine synthase (NAS), 473                          CO2 diffusion, 49, 50 
Nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide                          electron transport, 45, 47, 48 
           (NAD), 181                                      genetic engineering approaches, 45 
Nitrogen, 352                                              light intensity, 44 
Nitrous oxide, 173                                        non-steady-state, 44 
Nucleotide-binding-leucine-rich repeat                    photosynthetic induction, 44 
           (NB-LRR), 348                               photorespiration, 35–37 
Nucleotides, 398                                       Rubisco kinetics, 33, 35 
Nutrient deficiency, 19                                steady-state and non-steady-state, 46 
Nutrient fertilizers, 352–354                          thermotolerance, 37, 38 
Nutrient-use efficiency (NUE), 73                  Photosynthetic carbon metabolism (PCM), 12 
Nutritional deficiency, 472                        Photosynthetic efficiency, 33 
Nutritive quality, 19, 20                          Photosystem-II (PSII), 228 
                                                   Physiological and metabolic pathways, 353 
                                                   Physiological characterization, see  
O                                                             Temperature-sensitive genetic male  
Observation yield trial (OYT), 130                            sterile (TGMS) 
Oligosaccharyl transferase (OoOST), 409            Phytochelatins (PCs), 299 
Optimum temperature, 205                           Phytotoxicity, 302 
Oryza australiensis, 38                            Plant growth facility (PGF), 125 
Oryza meridionalis, 208                            Plant growth regulators (PGRs), 428 
Oryza rufipogon, 156                               Plant resistance, 349 
Oryzalin, 431                                      Planthopper genomes, 407 
Oxidized macromolecules, 186                       Planthoppers, 394, 395 
                                                   Pollen grains, 210 
                                                   Polycistronic tRNA-gRNA (PTG), 356 
P                                                  Posttranslational changes, 259 
Pattern recognition receptors (PRRs), 348          Prime editing guide RNA (pegRNA), 357 
Pattern-triggered immunity (PTI), 348, 408         Pronamide, 431 
Peroxidases, 181                                   Prorich protein (PRP), 253 
Pesticides, 286                                    Protein content (PC), 19 
Phenotypic screening, 326, 346                     Proteins, 258 
Phenotypic traits, 183                             Proteomic analysis, 212 
Phenotypic variation (PV), 156                     Proteomics, 258, 259 
Phloem protein2 promoter (pPP2), 9                 Protospacer adjacent motif (PAM), 356 
Phosphoenolpyruvate carboxylase                    Pseudomonas, 409 
           (PEPC), 40                              Pseudomonas fuscovaginae, 324 
Phosphoglycerate (PGA), 33                         Pyramiding lines (PDLs), 65 
Phosphoglycolate (PGO), 33                         Pyrosequencing approach, 408 
Photoperiod-sensitive genic male sterile           Pyrosequencing-based transcriptome  
           (PGMS), 101                                        analysis, 409 
Photoperiod-sensitive male sterility (PGMS), 4     Pyruvate decarboxylase (PDC), 181 

----------------------- Page 505-----------------------

496                                                                                               Index 

Q                                                     Rice establishment methods 
Quantitative trait loci (QTL), 156, 157, 183,             direct-seeded rice (DSR), 177 
           211, 292–294, 320,                             puddled transplanted rice, 176 
           435–437, 453–455                           Rice leaffolder (RLF), 16 
                                                      Rice tungro bacilliform virus (RTBV), 14, 324 
                                                      Rice tungro disease (RTD), 359 
R                                                     Rice tungro spherical virus (RTSV), 14, 324 
Rapid generation advancement (RGA), 125               Rice tungro virus (RTV), 13, 14 
Rapid viscosity analysis (RVA), 133–134               RNA interference (RNAi), 14, 396, 398 
Reactive oxygen species (ROS), 17, 70, 186,           RNA-induced silencing complex (RISC), 396 
           300, 348                                   Root architecture, 9 
Receptor-like kinase (RLK), 160                       Root-related traits, 9 
Recombinant inbred lines (RILs),   
            183, 435 
Regeneration, 426–431, 434, 441                       S 
Regional high-temperature damage, 205                 Salt overly sensitive (SOS) pathway, 18 
Relative humidity (RH), 207                           Sarocladium oryzae, 323 
Repeat variable di-residues (RVDs), 356               Saturated soil culture (SSC), 149, 154 
Resistance mechanism, 382                             Secreted salivary gland proteins (SSGPs), 408 
Respiration, 473                                      Seed production 
Restriction fragment length polymorphism                  self–seed multiplication, 134, 135 
           (RFLP) markers, 183                            two-line hybrid rice technology, 134 
Reverse breeding, 440                                 Seedling survival percentage (SSP), 227 
Rhizoctonia solani, 15, 322                           Selective introgression breeding (SIB),  
Ribonucleoproteins (RNPs), 359                                   263, 264 
Rice (Oryza sativa L.)                                Selective introgression lines (SILs), 84–85 
    food-deficit Asia, 1                              Self-fertility, 135 
    gene editing, 21                                  Serial analysis of gene expression  
    gene pool, 5                                                 (SAGE), 360 
    GSR, 9, 10                                        Sexual barriers, 5 
    huge demand projection, 1                         Sheath blight (ShB), 14, 322, 323 
    hybrid rice technology, 3, 4                      Sheath blight resistance (ShBR), 436 
    ideotype breeding, 7, 8                           Sheath rot (ShR), 323, 324 
    molecular and physiological breeding              Silene vulgaris, 187 
           strategies, 2                              Simple sequence repeat (SSR), 361, 434 
    physiological breeding approaches                 Single marker analysis (SMA), 185 
        abiotic stresses, 17–19                       Single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs), 183 
        biophysical stresses, 12                      Single-guided RNA (sgRNA), 265 
        biotic stresses, 13                           siRNA approach, 397 
        diseases, 13–15                               Site-specific nucleases (SSNs), 321 
        dwarfing genes, 10                            Small heat shock proteins (sHSP), 212 
        insect pests, 15, 16                          Small interfering RNAs (siRNAs), 396 
        photosynthesis, 11, 12                        Soil-and irrigation-based strategies 
        starch biosynthesis, 11                           aerobic rice development, 154 
    plant architecture, 7, 8                              AWD, 153 
    root architecture, 9                                  depletions, 154, 155 
    self-sufficiency, 1                                   environmental changes, 153 
    shoot and panicle architecture, 8, 9                  intensification, 155 
    strategies, 5                                         outflows, 154, 155 
    systematic breeding, 2                                saturated soil culture, 154 
    wild-weedy gene pools, 5, 7                           sprinkler irrigation, 155 
Rice breeding programs, 452                           Soil mulching, 155 
Rice Diversity Panel 1 (RDP1), 255                    Soil plant analysis development (SPAD), 227 

----------------------- Page 506-----------------------

Index                                                                                            497 

Solar radiation, 204                                Thermotolerance gene (TT1), 212 
Specific locus amplified fragment sequencing        Thioredoxin-mediated redox regulation, 49 
           (SLAF-seq) technology, 255               Tiller angle (TA), 14 
Spodoptera exigua, 398                              Tissue culture and genetic transformation  
Spodoptera litura, 399                                         protocols, 399 
Spontaneous genome doubling, 431                    Total drought response index (TDRI), 151 
Standard evaluation system (SES) scale, 322         Transcription activation-like effectors  
Streptomyces pyogenes, 356                                     (TALEs), 349 
Stress-regulated mechanisms, 82–84                  Transcription activator-like effector nucleases  
Stress-responsive genes, 161                                   (TALENs), 21, 265, 321, 455 
Superoxide dismutase (SOD), 229, 300                Transcription factors (TFs), 82 
Susceptible host (SH), 408                          Transcriptional/hormonal regulation, 9 
Sustainable development goal, 162, 450              Transcriptional regulation pathways, 253 
Systemic acquired resistance (SAR), 408             Transcriptomics, 120, 256–258 
                                                    Transformation-regeneration protocols, 18 
                                                    Transgenic approach, 21, 399, 400, 407 
T                                                   Transgenic maize plants, 396 
Temperature stress, 205                             Transgenic plants, 32, 36 
Temperature-sensitive genetic male                  Transgenic strategies, 160, 161 
           sterile (TGMS)                           Transgenics, 18 
    advantages, 111, 112                            Trifluralin, 431 
    breeding pollen parents, 126                    Tunable genotyping-by-sequencing (tGBS), 65 
    breeding trials, 130                            Two-dimensional gel electrophoresis  
    China, 100                                                 (2-DE), 258 
    combining ability nurseries, 130                Two-line hybrid rice technology, 101, 111 
    disadvantages, 111, 112 
    disease resistance, 133 
    food demand, 100                                U 
    genetically modified (GM) domain, 137           Uniform Blast Nursery (UBN), 322 
    genetics                                         Ustilaginoidea virens, 324 
       identification, 117, 120 
       molecular mechanisms, 120, 121 
    genome editing tools, 137                       V 
    grain quality, 133, 134                         Vigna aconitifolia, 18 
    hybrid rice technology, 100                     Vitamin deficiency–related health  
    indica/japonica hybrids, 126                               disorders, 20 
    insect pest, 133 
    international scientific communities, 100 
    male-sterile lines, 138                         W 
    multiplex gene editing, 137                     Water demand 
    mutation breeding, 122                              abiotic stresses, 161 
    pedigree breeding, 122                              aerobic rice varieties, 148 
    physiological characterization                      climate changes, 161 
       fertility-sterility alteration, 115              environmental conditions, 148 
       pollen parental lines, 116, 117                  food security, 148 
       sterility-fertility alteration, 115              human population, 148 
    public and private sectors, 101                     plant-based strategies 
    pyramiding, 123                                         cultivars/varieties, 150, 151 
    rapid fixation, 125, 126                                decreased stand density, 152 
    rice production, 100                                    planting date, 152 
    transfer, 123                                       plants, 149 
    two-line hybrid rice technology, 101, 111,          rainfed ecosystem, 148 
           136, 137                                     rice cultivation, 148 
    two-line rice hybrids, 127                          rice varieties, 161 

----------------------- Page 507-----------------------

498                                                                                                Index 

Water demand (cont.)                                  Z 
    stress-tolerant cultivars, 148                    Zinc-biofortified rice 
    transgenic strategies, 160, 161                       Bayesian network analysis, 456 
    water availability, 148                               biofortification, 450 
    water-deficient conditions, 148, 150                  breeding techniques, 451 
    water-limiting conditions, 149, 150                   deficiencies, 450 
    water management, 148                                 deficiency-related health  
Water scarcity, 173–176                                           consequences, 450 
Water-use efficiency, 40                                  donor identification, 452, 453 
Weed Tolerant Rice-1 (WTR-1), 65                          food-based approach, 450 
White-backed planthopper (WBPH)                           food habits, 459 
           resistance, 436                                genomic tools, 451 
Whole-genome sequencing (WGS), 80                         genotype × environment effects, 461 
Whole-genome sequence, 255                                germplasm enhancement, 459, 460 
Wide compatibility gene (WCG), 4                          high grain Zn, 451, 452 
Wide genetic variation, 207                               human health, 451 
Wide-compatibility (WC) gene, 126                         mainstreaming, 460, 461 
Wild abortive (WA), 3, 112                                micronutrients, 450 
Wolbachia, 407, 409                                       multiple interventions, 450 
                                                          multi-trait genomic selection, 457, 458 
                                                          network of metal homeostasis genes, 455 
X                                                         next-generation multi-nutrient, 462 
Xanthomonas , 355                                         phenotyping, 458 
Xanthomonas oryzae , 353                                  pre-breeding, 459, 460 
Xanthomonas oryzae pv. oryzae (Xoo) , 13                  product control, 462 
X-ray fluorescence (XRF), 458                             QTLs, 453–455 
                                                          rice traceability, 462 
                                                          varieties, 462 
Y                                                         yield, 453 
Yeast-like symbiont (YLS), 407                        Zinc-finger nucleases (ZFNs), 265, 321, 355,  
Yellow stem borer (Scirpophaga incertulas), 15                    356, 455 
